[page 1]
"fR;fia
tll"strations by Venu
ffieBooL
9\ra tras
A Comprefieruiae'heatise on tfu,
27 Consuffntbru
?rarh,Trhnl,L
Sagar Publications
72, Janpath, Ved Mansion
New Delhi-110001
Iel.: 23320648, 23328245
E-mail: sagarpub@del3.vsnl.net.in

[page 2]
Conunts
s.
No.
Description Page
No.
VII
I
19
35
51
67
83
101
rt7
135
151
167
183
199
215
23r
247
263
279
297
315
331
347
365
383
401
419
435
Introduction
1. Ashvini
2. Bharani
3. Krittika
4. Rohini
5. Mrigashira
5. Ardra
7. Punarvasu
8. Pushya
9. Ashlesha
10. Magha
11. PurvaPhalguni
t2. UttaraPhalguni
13. Hasta
L4. Chitra
15. Swati
16. Vishakha
L7. Anuradha
18. Jyeshta
19. Mula
20. Purvashadha
2t. Uttarashadha
22. Shravana
23. Dhanishta
24. Shatabhisha
25. PurvabhadraPada
26. UttarabhadraPada
27. Revati

[page 3]
Abhijit
Example Charts
Afterwordr
Bibliography
Sexual Compatibility Table
. Marriage Compatibility Table
OSFA
' 
ril
1. Ashvini
2. Bharani
3. Krittika
4. Rohini
5. Mrigashira
6. Ardra
7. Punarvasu
8. Pushya
9. Ashlesha
10. Magha
11. Purvaphalguni
12. Uttaraphalguni
13. Hasta
14. Chitra
15. Swati
16. Vishakha
t7. Anuradha
18. Jyeshta
' 19. Mula
20. Purvashadha
21. uttarashadha
22. Shravana
23. Dhanishta
24. Shatabhisha
25. Purvabhadrapada
26. Uttarabhadrapada
27. Revati
453
455
483
484
485
486
488
I[hstratioru
1
19
35
51
67
83
101
rt7
135
151
167
183
199
2t5
23L
247
263
279
297
315
331
347
365
383
401
419
43s
***
,*

[page 4]
Introfirction
In Vedic system of Astrology, known in sanskrit as Jyotish, the 27 constellations and not the 12
star-signs form the core of understanding celestial influences on our planet. These 27 constellabons
ar-e,.f1${Ul$ the 27 Nakhatas.
The term "Nakhatra", when broken down into its constituent parts :- "na/<s" meaning "sky"
and "shetra" meaning "region", fandaGs into "Sky Map". Another translation is arrived at by a
different dissection 1- t'1lgllfigg't is "map" and "tara" is "star" and so Nakshatra is "Star Map',.
Both meanings clearly shows that in the eyes of the ancient vedic seers it is the 27 nakshatas
(consteffations) and not the 12 rashis (zcd,iacal star-signs), which map the sky.
Jyotish (Vedic Astrology) without nakhatras is as incomplete as the human body is without
eyes. If Jyott'sh is the "eye of the vda",then Nakshatrasare the "eyes of Jyotish'i
The 27 nakhatras, in a way, represent our journey from the moment of birth to the moment of
death. The ideal path of one's passage in life can be viewed through the 27 nakshatras in a short,
general way : -
"Aswini relates to the first year or so of our lives, where we are totally dependant on outside
support for our survival and operate from a purely instinctual awareness.
Bharani represents the time, when as infants, we staft growing teeth and undergo other
transformative processes like change of diet. Here we have to take on more responsibility, such as
stafting to learn to eat by ourselves. One noUces that a sense of primeval will, which usually relates
to wanting and not wanting, is seen here.

[page 5]
vilt
Next comes the stage of the learning process where we learn to walk, talk etc. All this initial
fearning process happens under the influence of Krittika. This stage can extend up to four or five
years of age. The process of learning to write is also paft of this stage. A sense of discipline is
required at this stage and one has to outgrow the purely primordial awareness of Aswini and Bharani'
After this follows Rohini, where one starts understanding and enjoying the material world with
their newfound knowledge gathered in the previous stage.
Mrigashiraisthe point where we follow wherever our curiosity takes us andin Ardrait is time to
analyze and understand our experiences.
purnavasuiswhere emotions come into being for the fipt time. One begins to understand one's
role in family and society. Playfulness is combined with a sense of caring'
pushya represents the stage when more responsibility is taken. This is the age around 16,
where one falls in love with life and everything seems so full of promise and wonder'
Ashtesha comes into picture at around 18 -20 years, where the harsh realities of the world
dawn upon us and we have to wriggle our way through. There is no place for naievete, as one tries
to find one's own way through the jungle of life. This coincides with Rahu's maturity age.
Once we find our way, our identity and individuality are established under the auspices of
Magha. This usually takes place around 21. Here, one also becomes aware of one's roots and how
they are relevant in the scheme of things.
After one's individuality is established, one tends to relax and be creative under the impulses of
puruaphalguni. The search for a partner begins. Some might marry and think of having children at
this time.
tlttaraphatgunifollows, making one concentrate on having a fix€d role in society and on family
issues. It is about finding one's social individuality, rather than personal individuality, which occurs in
Magha.
#fra

[page 6]
tx
In Hasta, one immerses themselves in worldly responsibilities and affairs and tries to be clever
and crafty in it. This is the time for making plans and starting projects.
Chitrais where we create our works, the plans having being formed in Hasta are now manifested
in reality.
Swati is where we sell our creations to the world. In other words, we relate to the world
through business.
After the business is done and riches are acquired, a longing arises for something more
meaningful. This catharsis happens within the domain of Vishakha.
This longing is only fulfilled in Anuradha, through the wisdom gained in understanding the
secrets of nature.
Once this is achieved, one begins to be seen ., u r"r0".,* and responsible elder-figure, under
the energies of Jyahta and a feeling of pride and superiority sets in.
Mula crushes whatever we have built so far, and shows us that there is a lot more left to unravel
and understand. In a way this is the beginning of the impersonal.
lnthe Puruashadha stage which follows, one feels invincible as the results of overcoming the
trials and transformations experienced in Mula. One begins to share its wisdom and experience with
the world, but still in a somewhat individualistic way.
ln Uttarashadha, one is forced to look at the bigger picture and sublimate oneb individuality for
collective purposes.
After one's individuality is zublimated, one becomes receptive to the fainter but deeper universal
voices under the auspices of Shrauana.
Whatever we have learnt from our receptivity in Shrauana, is used for working in tune with the
rhythm of the universal mind, as symbolised by Dhanishta. This often bestows wealth, abundance
and fuffillment on all levels. . , z , ,j,

[page 7]
x
After one has enjoyed the abundance, there is a longing for something even more fulfilling.
This catharasis takes place in Shatabisha, a place where one ponders over the question of existence
itself.
This questioning ultimately leads one to severe penance and austerities under the influence of
Puruabhadnpda. One is ready to sacrifice everything on a material, mental and emotional plane, in
order to gain the ultimate knowledge.
The reaf path to gaining this knowledge is shown in Uttarabhadnpada, which shows that the
ultimate wisdom and knowledge can be gained through easier, milder and more peaceful means.
This is where the understanding of the middle-way or the middle-path comes into being.
The following of the middle way finally leads to attainment of complete enlightenment under
the care of Revati, the final nakshatra. All dualities, complexjties, philosophies, actions and reactions
merge in the celestial ocean represented by Reuati, and like Vishnu, one rises above this ocean free
from all of them.
It goes without saying, that for most people, the stages represented by the nakshatras, hold
more meaning, depending on those nakhatras which are occupied by the planets or ascendant in
an individual's horoscope. Especially in today's out-of-balance society, the ideal path outlined by the
nakhatras, as described above, only applies partially to the majority of us.
Nakhatras, however, still form the core of understanding a nativity. For example, if a learned
astrologer sees a chaft with Aquarius rising on the ascendant and goes about making a character
sketch of the native on the basis of the general traits of Aquarius as a sign, they would find that their
derivations are too general, non-specific and even completely wrong in some aspects. This is because
Aquarius carries energies of three nakshatras - Dhanishta, Shatabhisha and Puruabhadrapada - all of
whic'h have totally different nature, characteristics and functionings. The same applies to all the
planetary placements.
One cannot expect a person to have an amiable and harmonizing nature just because their
Moon is posited in the sign Libra. This would be the case if the Moon was placed in the Swati prt of
-ffir,

[page 8]
XI
Libra, but the scenario would be entirely different if Moon was placed in the relatively more complicated
nakshatra, Wshakha.
In this work, the study of each Nakhatra has been divided into 23 sections, which simplifies
the process of dealing with the multifarious aspects of their functionings.
It is the author's hope, that this work will fuel fufther research on these cosmic transmitters
and in time we would be able to attain the clear and complete understanding, which our forefathers
possessed.
Thtoughout this wotlc:
* The term 'Ketu' refers to South Node of the Moon
x The term 'Rahu' refers to the North Node of the Moon

[page 9]
t. {shvini o'o' - lr"zot {rfes

[page 10]
1.
tLsfioini
i6j (00000' Aries - 13o20' Aries)
,lj
In tfu SkA t
Ashvini, the beginning of everything, especially Ketu's cnergies, is represented in the celestial
firmament by two bright stars in the constellation of Aries. The ancient vedic seers saw the constellation
of Aries as forming a horse's head, and thus these two stars were seen as making a similar pattern'
These stars are known in modern astronomy as Alpha-Arietes (Hanall & futa-Arietes (Sheratan).
Afpha-Arietes is slightly brighter with a visual magnitude of 2.02, while Beta-Arietes has a visual
magnitude of 2.66. These relatively bright stars lie very close to the planetary ecliptic, right below
the bright constellation of Andromeda, and are easy to locate in the night sky.
A{ame :
"Ashvini" can be translated into either "Born of a Female Horse" or the "Horse-Woman". The
first meaning is clear but the second one leaves one confused as to whedter the woman is riding a
horse, or is she a mythical creature with a horse's head and woman's body. As we shall discover later.
it is probably the latter.
Its alternative name is Asvayuj, which translates into "she who yokes horses". Once again a
strong emphasis on the horse and a female is seen, the root of which we would discover when we
get to its ruling deities

[page 11]
Synhot:
Ashvini's main symbol is a "horse's head". This symbol, as we ctln see, is in keeping with its
name. A horse's head conveys the idea of "a beginning". One can notice how riders pat their horse's
neck before beginning any journey. From time immemorial a horse has been seen as a symbol of
polver, courage, movement and vitality. A horse's head signifies an eagerness to act and a swiftness
of approach. A.horse as we know is always ready to make joumeys, not for its own ends, but for the
ends of its rider or others in general. 1'", ..' t
If one has had the chance of being close to a horse, one will realize that a horse's head conveys
a ceftain amount of sensitivity and alertness. Since Ashvini lies in the beginning of the sign Aries,
which is seen as representing the head of the kala purusha (the eternal being), it makes sense that
Ashvini be related to a head of some kind. The head of course relates to the brain, the controlling
organ of all body functions. Thus Ashvini automatically relates to mental impulses and leadership.
Horses are nervous, fidgety and highly strung animals. Therefore this nakhatra carries all of these
qualities in good measure.
Its alternative symbol is a 'horse carriage consisting of two horses carrying two people'. This
symbolism relates to the presiding deities of this nakshatra. This symbol once again emphasizes a
need for movement and relates to transpoftntion of all kinds. This movement can relate to materiq[
transportation m the earth or bavelling between diffierent worlds, realms or planes.
Deity :
The Ashvini Kumaras, the two celestial horsemen, are regarded as the main presiding deities of
this nakshatra. Their names are Dashra and Nasatya, which translate into "bringing help" and
"truthfulness" respectively. There's no ancient culture where one cannot find stories and legends
carrying their symbolism. The tales often show two heroic brothers travelling around solving the
problems of whosoever they encounter in their travels.
!o
1t

[page 12]
In the Vedic legend they are twin brothers, who were born out of the union of Sun and his wife
hnjana, when they were in the form of a stallion and a mare. One can refer to the previous author's
book "Sun ' The Cosmic Powerhouse" (Sagar Publications, India) for the full story. These two
brothers are seen as the celestial physicians in ancient Vedic texts. This is where the healino and
rejuvenating aspect of this nakhatra stems from.
The Ashvini Kumaras are supposed to have knowledge of all herbs on the physical and astral
plane; and are supposed to possess supernatural powers to cure any disease or fix any problem.
They are pafticularly concerned with friction or obstacles which might come up between married
couples. Thus Ashvini is a nakshatra which promotes marital harmony. Ashvini Kumaras are also
invoked to aid childbiffi. They are also very well known in the ancient legends for curing impotence
and other types of sexual disorders.
This nakshatra reflects the divine qualities of these two beings as best as it can be done on the
material plane. The Ashvini Kumaras are considered so powerful that they can make the old become
young and even bring the dead back to life. They themselves have a youthful appearance and never
age. This explains the ageless quality of this nakshatra. The generosity and compassion of the
Ashvini Kumaras extends to the animals as well. There are a lot of stories of them saving gentle
animals like lambs from preying creatures like wolves.
In our view, Brahma, the creator among the Trinity, can be regarded as the overseer of this
nakshatra. Not many scholars have shed light on this aspect, but the fact remains that this nakshatra
represents the beginning of all things, including creation. Brahma is the architect of the universe and
is responsible for all types of beginnings.
Ganesha, the elephant headed son of Paruati and Shiva, is also strongly attached with this
asterism' Ganesha also represents the beginnings of all things and is regarded as the remover of
obstacles. It is interesting to note that this nakshatra can be summed up by the phrase "RLmover of
obstacles". Ganesha is also the main presiding deity of Ketu, the planet ruling this nakshatra. His
four main qualities - puritv, auspiciousness, innocence and supreme devotion to the Universal Mother
principle, can be seen manifesfed through the functionings of Astrvini

[page 13]
Afature U fwrctbnlnt :
'Spontaneous'is the word which sums up this nakhatra's nature and functioning. It is a nakshatra
which is way ahead of all the other nakshatras as far as initiating anything is concerned. It is also the
quickest amongst the nakshatras. All associated qualities with quickness like agility and speediness
form the core of Ashvini's functioning. One can see that in order to be quick one has to be direct and
to the point. Thls nakshatra has a straightforward, no nonsense approach to dealing with things and
life in general.
The natives with prominent Ashvini never lose a minute in converting their impulses into thoughts
and their thoughts into action. This often results in an impulsive behaviour pattern, which in its
negative aspect often leads to rashness. All the phrases like "Hurry causes delay, and haste makes
waste", seem to be aimed directly at Ashvini natives.
Ashvini natives are usually brimming with life, nave tivety intelligence, a quick comprehension
ability and a happy go lucky disposition. Their appearance is usually youthful and eager. They seem
to age less quickly than other nakhatra types. When Ashvini is rising on the Ascendant, it makes the
person shoft, athletic, robust and charming in an innocent soft of way. In fact natives with prominent
Ashvini can be singled out by their innocent looks and childish demeanour. Since the Ashvini Kumaras
are known for their charm, elegance, style and extravagance - these qualities are reflected in the
mental and physical makeup of Ashvini natives.
Ashvini natives usually have a strong spirit of adventure and revel in encountering the unknown.
A spirit of adventure always requires courage and this nakshatra has loads of it. It is a fearless
nakshatra which derives satisfaction from heroic pursuits. For example, a person bungy jumping at
the age of ninety could only be an Ashvini type. In its negative aspect, this quality often comes out
as foolhardiness, and Ashvini natives have a tendency to suffer a lot as a result. The lesser evolved
among such natives show a marked tendency not to learn ftom their mistakes, and can de seen to
be repeating the same mistake over and over again. There is definitely a lack of reflection associated
with this nakshatra and the bad news is that things don't usually improve with age.

[page 14]
Ttrere's a distinct sense of humour associated with this nakshatra. Natives have a light hearted
and jovial humour and possess an ability to laugh at themselves and others. Its peculiar bnnd of
humour is best exemplified by Charlie Chaplin movies.
The constant need for movement makes the Ashvini natives completely useless at all activities
requiring stillness and patience. This is the reason why they are very rarely seen to bring to completion
what they have begun. They have enough motivatbn when it comes to iniUating new activities, but
they find it hard to stick it out. r
Ashvini natives are known for having an eye for the needs of others and a helpful nature, but in
our experience they are more likely to be helpful in short term things or those requiring quick bursb
of energy. If something requires long term attention, Ashvini natives are likely to transfer their
responsibilities to some other nakshatra type and move onto the next thing.
Their innate urge to quickly move onto the next thing makes them lose out as far as attaining
enduring knowledge and wisdom is concerned. This is especially the case with younger and less
evolved souls. In today's hyper-materialistic day and age, such natives can easiry scatter their lives
away moving from one triviality or distraction to the nelt. 'Naivete' is the keyword which sums up
such Ashvini types. Ashvini natives usually have an independent and confident spirit and don,t like to
be told what to do. This quality is similar to that of a wild or untamed horse. This is alright in evolved
souls who know exactly which path to follow, but for those who have not reached that level it makes
them want to do things their own way, without even knowing what to do. Such Ashvini types can be
very stubborn and unyielding, and are likely to ignore all good counsel. Just like the wildest horse
can be tamed, all Ashvini natives can be made to tow the line if handled with a certain degree of
sensitivity and caution, mixed with aggression and firmness.
Ashvini natives usually like to dress well and can be seen spending u .onriOera'Ule amount of
time on their wardrobe. They are direct, straightforward people and appreciate the same Quality in
others. They are always fascinated by all affairs related to healing, rejuvenation and self-improvement
practices of all kinds. They can be easily found in the local health club and most of the bodily
improvement advertisments seem to be directed at them,

[page 15]
Ashvini natives like to be unique in whatever they do and how they are seen. All Ashvini natives
have a marked tendency to feel unique in comparison to others. They like to think that they have
some special gifu which others do not possess. It is true that they have a pioneering approach to
things, which makes them a step ahead of the rest. In the present day and age they are tlte ones
that are likely to catch on to the new trends and happenings first.
One peculiarity of Ashvini natives is that they are moderate eaters and are modest in any
circumstance. Despite their unique qualities, they are not the show off types and are not likely to
gloat over their accomplishments. They have a thing about being self sufficient and don't like to be
dependant on others. Ashvini is a very resourceful nakshatra. Natives under its influence always
seem to come up with the required resources under the most adverse circumstances, as if by magic.
They are competent and sincere about whatever they do, although they may lack the discipline and
endurance required to achieve perfection. Ashvini natives,who have endurance are often very
successful at whatever they choose to do. This endunnce factor usually comes from other factors in
a chaft rather than Ashvini itself.
Mo[e of functioning :
In keeping with its basic nature and disposition, ancient Vedic seers saw this as an Active
asterism. This comes as no surprise as this nakshatra relates to the very beginning of all activities. It
ls the basic primordial force which introduces activity into passivity of time and space. The original
creative spark cannot be anything but active.
Caste :
tt UetongJto the Vaishya or merchant caste of nakshatras. It might surprise some to know that
the original creative spark is a business man, but the ancient Vedic seers did not have the above
indication in mind when they designated the Vtishya caste to this asterism. Doing any kind of
hsiness requires a lot d initiaUve and there is no nakshatra with more initiative than Ashvini, so it

[page 16]
automaUcally gets connected to all kinds of business activities on the material as well as other
planes of existence. Business out here cannot just be seen as buying and selling goods, as is mostly
the case nowadays. It relates to interaction and exchange on many different levels, and the primordial,
unconscious motivations underlying all activity. In the present context horruever, Ashvini natives gn
be seen to be good at doing business and making money.
Qendtr :
It is a male nakshatra, since it is the first nakshatra and the number'l' relates to the mah
aspect in nature. This nakshatra projects the archetypical masculine qualities like drive, ambltion,
logic and initiative. It is also mainly connected to male planets like Sun and Mars. All its presiding
deities are also male.
tsofyparts U t{umor (Ayurvedic Corstitution) :
Knees and the top portion of the feet are the main body parts ruled by this nakshatra. Its
association with knees is evident from its association with movement. Knees are the body parts
which provides us our capacity for walking, running and jumping. Horses cirn run fast because they
have strong knees. The feet again are related to our ability to move.
It is a primarily "Vata" (airy) nakhatra. Vata as we know carries a very moveable energy in
tune with this nakshatra's basic nature. All of nature's moveable creahrres like birds, have a Vata
disposition.
Direction.' ' :
Its rnain directions are centre, east, south and nodfiwest.

[page 17]
10
eades (Qnrurs) :
The first pada or quafter of this asterism 00" 00' - 3 20'Aries, falls in Aries Navamsa and is
ruled by Mars. This is the pada which relates to the most pioneering, courageous and physically
active part of this nakshaba. This pada is full of initiative and bestows abundant energy and drive.
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 30 20' - 6o 40' Aries, falls in Taurus Navamsa ruled
by Venus' This pada relates to the more practical and resourceful aspect of this nakshatra. It is
connected to the splendorous, graceful and indulgent aspect of the Ashvini Kumaras. This pada likes
to see the material manifestation of its thoughts and ideas.
The third pada or quafter of this asterism 60 40' - 10o 00' Aries, falls in Gemini Navamsa ruled
by Mercury. This pada relates to the light, humorous, communicative aspect of this nakshatra. This
pada gives a very quick comprehension and makes one adept at all kinds of mental activity. It can be
said to be the speedy jack of the zodiac.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 10o 00' - 13' 2;' Aries, falls in Cancer Navamsa ruled
by Mmn. This pada relates to the healing part of Ashvini. This pada has an eye for people's needs,
and is usually very in tune with the pulse of the collective consciousness at any given point in time.
It is the birth place of the emotional faculty which manifests itself as empathy.
lProfessiors :
Equestrian professions, Horse Tminers & Keepers and all those involved in Equine jobs or sporls;
Horse Racing Enthusiasts/Gamblers; All types of Healing Professions (in the present day and age -
Physicians, Therapists, Chemists, Counsellors, Physiotherapists, Druggists & Surgeons); Marriage
Counsellors and Childbirth Specialists; Those involved in Promotional & Motivationaljobs & campaigns;
Physical Arts like Dancing; Those involved in the Transportation Industry; Athletes and all Sport
related jobs; Herbologists; Gardeners; Teachers & Educators for Beginners; All those involved in
Racing Professions like Motor Sports; Adventure Sports; Explorers; Stunt Men; Researchers & pioneers;
Concretors & all those involved in laying foundations in the building industry; People in Law

[page 18]
11
Enforcement ng"n.Lq Soldiers; Generals; Mechanical Engineers & those involved in Engineering
Professions in general; Jewellers especially Goldsmiths; Small businpss owners and Shopkeepers in
general.
Q{acu : r:i-r:j*!si i,,L
All places related to Equine professions - Grazing Lands, Stables, Horse Tracfts etc.; Hospitals
and Places associated with the Medical Profession; Places where Herbs grow; Botanical Gardens;
Sporting Grounds; Race Tracks of all kinds; Roads, Railway Track and all other types of Paths meant
for Transportation; Military Bases; Research Centres; Technological & Industrial Centres; Health
Clubs & Gymnasiums; All places where InitiaUons and Beginnings are done; Kindergartens & prinnry
Schools.
guna (T-ssenre) anil tattwa (Ebment) :
This is a Sattwic nakshatra. It's Sattwic quality relates to the purity and innocence attached
with all types of beginnings, including the creation of our universe. What ancient Vedic seers are
saying through this is that - "In the beginning only Sattwa exists, and Rajasand TamasmanifsL
themselves afterwards."
It belongs to the Earth element. All beginnings including the beginning of our universe have
one and only one objective - material manifestation
Qana (Typdt
It is considered a godly or Deva nakshatra. This comes as no surprise as all of its presiding
deities are predominantly godly in nature.

[page 19]
12
Oricntation U Dispositint :
" It is a Level nakshatra. Level nakshatras are useful for levelling things. This applies almost
literally to this asterism, as it is associated with all kinds of levelling activities such as laying foundations
fur houses, buildings etc. We can see that the levelling aspect is very important in Ashvini when it
@mes b phces like racetracks, roads etc.
It is a Moveable or Ephemeral nakshatra. This means that it relates to travelling and change in
all its furms. One doesn't have to think twice before assigning a moveable disposition to this nakshatra.
This is the most restless among all the nakshatras and is happy only in movement. This movement
normally expresses itself through the mental and physical planes.
Lwnr Montfr" U Datt :
It relates to the first half of the lunar month of ,Ashvinl. This usually relates to the month of
September or October in the solar calendar.
Ashvini is also related to the Pnthma (lst Uthi or day) of the waxing phase of the Moon's
monthly cycle.
Atupicious Actiaities :
Good for all types. of beginnings and initiations, especially those involving learning new things;
Laying foundation stones; Taking medicines; Good for all healing, rejuvenation and exercise; Good
for improving physical appearance, self improvement on other levels, and age prevention techniques;
Good for all activiUes requiring quickness of thought and action; Equine related activities; Favourable
fior buying or selling; Travelling; Repairing vehicles or machinery of any kind; Putting on clothes &
jewellery; Planting seeds; Learning astrology and other spiritual, occult sciences; Especially good for
installing sacred items such as altars, statues, temples etc.; Legal activities; Favourable for taking up
a new name.

[page 20]
13
**The first pada of this nakshatra can be avoided for performing activities in general.
Inauspi^cinus Actirtitits :
Unfavourable for marriage; All kinds of endings; All kinds of activities requiring patience and
perseverence; Sexual activity; Not good for activities which are heavy on the emotional ptane;
Intoxication; Not good for completions of any kind.
lP{anetary Rytcr
The planetary ruler of this nakshatra is Ketu. Ketu as we know relates to all types of beginnings
and thus is directly related to the initiatory impulse inherent in this nakshatra. Among the plane6,
Ketu is the only one which represents the power of the past, which can be utilised to h€l the person
in the present. Ketu's power of rejuvenation and regeneration ii akin to the phoenix rising from the
ashes, and as mentioned eadier, this nakshatra's ruling deities can even bring the dead back to life.
The creativity of this nakshatra corresponds to Ketu's primordial creative potential arising from
the will aspect of nature. However this creative force can sometimes be so strong and overwhelming
that it becomes difficult to control or channel. This is where things go wrong with this nakshatra. Its
downfall usually comes through attempting close to impossible feats without proper consid'eration.
However when it succeeds, it gets the pioneer label. This nakshatra has a strong faith in magic and
the dictum - t'anything is possible". For a more detailed understanding of its connection with Ketu,
the readers can refer to the author's previous work, "The Rahu-Ketu Experience /The Astotogy of
the Lunar Nds" (hgar publications,India) or 'The Key of Llfe " (Lotus pess, usA).
Mars connects to this nakshatra, being the planetary ruler of the sign Aries. Mars as we know is
the planet of energy, and energy is a must for any kind of initiatory impulse. Without energy there
can be no movement. In a way it can be said that Mars is the engine which drives Ashvini,s car

[page 21]
14
This nakshatra also has a close relationship with Sun, since Sun reaches maximum exaltation
here. In numerology Sun is related to the number'1', and since this is the first nakshatra, it is also
directly connected with the number'1'. This nakshatra has an independent spirit in much the same
way as Sun. It is interesting to note that Sun is also a continuously moving entity, which is supposed
to ride on a chariot of seven horses. The readers can also recall that the two Ashvini Kumaras are the
sons of our Sun.
Sun, Ketu and Mars express themselves strongly when placed in Ashvini. Mercury Venus, Jupiter
and Rahu are good here as long as Ketu is well placd. Conjunctions of Sun/Ketu; Sun/Mars and
Mars/Ketu carry energies similar to Ashvini.
iloue{s and Atpfiabe* :
The first pada or quafter of this asterism 00" 00' - 3o 20' Aries corresponds to "Chu" as in Chuck
or Church.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 3o 20' - 60 40' Aries corresponds to "Che" as in
Cherry.
The third pada or quarter of this asterisrn 6" 40' - 10o 00' Aries corresponds to "Cho" as in
Chocolate.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 1Oo 00' - 13o 20' Aries corresponds to "La" as in
Larry or Las Vegas.
In the Sanskrit alphabet Ashvini corresponds to "Am", "Aam" & "Im", consequently its mantras
are "Om Am", "Om Aam" & "Om Im"'

[page 22]
15
SeretaI type ond Compati1ility :
Its sexual animal is a Horse. Horses are sensitive and passionate creatures and these qualities
find expression in Ashvini's sexuality. The natural grace of horses gives Ashvini natives appeal and
sexiness, Ashvini is most compatible with other horse nakhatras like Shatabishak.
For sexual & marriage compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the tables on pages
457 & 458 .
Tsoteric :
Ashvini represents the primordial, initiatory urge which created both the manifest and unmanifest
universes. Being the beginning of all things, it has the power to set anything right. This is why in
later times, the physicians of the gods, the Ashvini Kumaras, were entertwined with the energies of
this nakshatra. In almost all ancient cultures, the roots of whichbf course are the same, one can find
the'divine physician'archetype. Astoundingly, all these divine physician archetypes are very similar
to the Ashvini Kumaras in the sense that - they are always riding horses, they are mostly twins, they
are born out of a water goddess or a water source of some sort. The Ashvini Kumaras are very
learned in Ayurueda, the original healing system. They revived the sage Dadhichi. Indra warned
Dadhichi not to teach the Kumaras Brahma-Vidya (knowledge of creation) since their occupation
placed them outside that realm. He promised to cut off Dadhichi's head should he not heed the
warning. Dadhici relayed this to the Kumaras. With their great medical abilities however they removed
Dadhici's head and replaced it with a horse head. Dadhichi then spoke to them through the horses
mouth. They were then able to replace the original human head of Dadhici after Indra cut off the
horse head.
The Ashvini Kumaras restoring the youth of Cyavana Muni. Through this service to a powerful
Muni, the twins were granted the right to drink Soma Rasa, an immortalizing drink, with the other
demigods. In Mahabharata, Nakul & Sahadeva the youngest amongst the 5 Pandava brothers were
sons of Ashvini Kumaras.

[page 23]
16
An ancient Welsh legend, which still holds relevance today in the minds of the Welsh people,
illustrates this fact. According to this legend, three sons were bom from a lady which had emerged
from a lake called lannefann. These semi -divine beings, known as the "Physicians of Myddfai",
were known to be able to cure every disease and were even able to dow down the ageing process.
The lake can still be visited today. This story definitely supports the assumption, which is gaining
ground now, that the ancient Celtic religion was the same as the ancient Vedic religion. It corrobrates
well with the puranic story of the birth of Ashvini Kumaras. Vivasvan's (the Solar Diety) wife Samjna
once ran away from her husband and in order to hide from him took the body of a mare while she
performed austerities on Earth. Vivasvan, who was seraching for her, finally found her by the side of
a lake and turned himself into a horse and out of their union these twin sons, the Ashvini Kumaras,
were born.
Whilst discussing the asterism Shatabisha( we came across the fact that oceans are known to
carry enough herbs to cure every known disease, besides carrying other types of magical herbs. In
the ancient Vedic legend concerning the "Churning of the Ocean", (please refer to the author's
previous work - 'The Rahu-Ketu Experience" Sagar Publications, India or 'The Key of Life" Lotus
Press, USA), the Ashvini Kumaras were born out of this churning of the ocean. We can see that the
Ashvini Kumaras and Shatabhishak have a strong connection due to the correlation between their
ruling deitieq. It is said that diseases which are caused under the influence of Shatabhishak can only
be cured under the influence of Ashvini. Since every beginning is a kind of rejuvenation, Ashvini has
the power to overcome any affliction on the physical, mental, emotional and higher planes.
'In the universal scheme of things, Ashvini relates to 'bhidravyapani shakti" or the power to
quickly attain one's objective. It is clear from the above that Ashvini is representative of the universal
energy whiclr assists everyone in need without hesitaUon or delay'

[page 24]
'n.4
Lq^lt^*A .l/u,zqts An-e---
' ( ,on, 'fr'zt'*^ U""IL el^'2 .. ; A .t lt
J[^."iI1 ("%Ku4Lq-
\ I . k*L$ -iquL ;, t!*ift''^ fu*$+J
Qotro (Cetc,stiat tturyd t \,/'^:;:r;
This nakshatra is related to the Sage Marichi, one of the seven celestial sages looking after the
affairs of our galary, The name of this sage translates into "light". This oomes as no surprise as
Ashvini is the lightest and swiftest amongst the 27 nakshatras.
knw[ia[ :
For those suffering from bad effects resulting from afflictions to this nakshatra, the best remedial
measure is worship of "Lord Ganesha".
Repetition of the rmt mantra of this nakshatra - "Om Am" and "Om Imn 108 times when Moon
transits this nakshatra and in its corresponding lunar month, is sure to reduce suffering and bring
enfightenment into a person's life.
Persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of inis nakshatra can also increase the
good etrects through the above mentioned ways. It is helpful for them to wear various shades of red
and bright variegated colours, They should use Ashvini's directions, lunar month and U|g days when
Moon transits Ashvini to undertake all important actions.
E4atnp{"e :
Bruce Le, the famous martial aftist, was born with Ashvini rising on his Ascendant. His life in its
enurety illustrates all the different aspects of this nakshatra. Besides his amazing swiftness and
quickness, the event which immediately illustrates Ashvini's energies relates to the almost magical
recovery he made from an injury which doctors thought would paralyze him for life.

[page 25]
18
vMisceffaneous :
According to Vanhamihin, "Moon in Ashvini gives good appearance, rnanners and intelligence.
The native is fond of dressing up and ornaments. The native is skilled in their chosen field."
The singer of the 60's musical group "The fuorc", Jim Monison, has his Moon in Ashvini. If we
ignore his outbursts in public appearances, the description fits him perfectly.
**rt

[page 26]
Z. $harani tr"Zo' -26"+0' d.ies

[page 27]
2.
lBfiarari
(13020' Aries - 26o40' Aries)
In tfu Sky t
a:.?:. .il . i.,,
Bharani, the heralder of Venusian energy, is represented in the celestial firmament by a group
of three faint stars forming a triangle in the constellation of Aries. The ancient vedic seers saw these
stars as forming the female sexual organ. These stars are known in modern astronomy as
35-Arietes, 39-Arietes & 4t-Arietes. 4l-Arietes is the brightest among the three, with a visual
magnitude of 3.62, which explains the faintness of the stars of this asterism. It is only through being
privy to some direct universal (galactic, in this case) knowledge, that the ancient seers were able to
attach such importance to these relatively faint group of stars. In order to locate these stars in the
night sky, one has to focus in the region between the bright star Alpha-Arietes (belonging to the
previous asterism, Ashvint) and the bright group of stars of Pleiades star cluster (belonging to the
next asterism, Krittika). It is easier to locate 4l-Arietes,while the other two can be seen lying in a
straight line on its right hand side.
9r(rme :
"Bharani" 6n be roughly translated into either "Bearing" or "She who Bears". It must be noted,
however, that it doesn't necessarily mean bearing a child as in the case of pregnancy, even though
we would discover later how this asterism is directly related to the womb. The name, which conveys
a major part of this asterism's energy, relates primarily to the feminine side of natu're and its capacity
to receive, hold, nurture and destroy.

[page 28]
2
Sym6o[:
The main symbol of this asterism is a "vagina", the female sexual organ. In effect all the female
reproductive organs can be seen as the symbols of this nakshatra. In all ancient cultures these
$gans as symbols were seen to represent the fertility aspect of nature. In the Egyptian civilization,
the vagina is symbolically represented asthe Buckle of Isisand is seen as the doorway between
different worldS. The Vedic point of view also ascribes birth, death, transformation and regeneration
to the feminine reproductive symbols. They are also seen to represent restraint, caution, jealousy,
secrecy, forebearance, struggle, sacrifice, cartharsis, sexuality, nurturing and maternal love. Bharani
therefore carries all the above mentioned attributes.
Since a soul finds its entry from the astral plane to the physical world of the living through the
female sex organ, it is not very hard to see the'dooruvay'connotation associated with this symbolism.
As we shaf f discover later, Yama, the lord of death and one of the eight door keepers between the
physical and the other worlds, is the ruling deity of this nakshatri. The womb as we know carries the
new life in the form of a foetus for several months, before it finally finds itself manifested in the
world. In the same way, Bharani allows things to brew on subde planes, before they suddenly take
outer material forms. In the case of childbirths, it is usually very hard to predict which day the water
is going to break. The same is the case with revolutions, which usually brew within the heafts and
minds of people for a while before suddenly erupting. The same is applicable to death as well. This
makes Bharani an unpredictable nakshatra, which operates in hidden ways and revels in secrecy.
A "boat" is the alternative symbol of this nakshatra. It again symbolizes transportation between
different planes and realms of existence. Bharani is thus a nakshatra directly related to the proess
of birth, death and regeneration, at least on the earthly plane of existence.
Deity :
Yama,the lord of death, is considered the main presiding deity of this asterism. He is supposed
to be one of the eight celestial gatekeepers, who guard the eight directional doorways or exits

[page 29]
through which the souls travel from the earthly plane to other planes of existence. In the Vedic
texts, he is mostly seen as the Lord of Dharma. This apparent mixing of the deities of Death and
Dharma may not be instantly clear to the western reader. However when seen in the light of the fact
it is Yama's duty to assign the life paths for the souls who have left their earthly bodies, it becomes
cfear that he has to be well versed in the laws of karma and dharma.
Yama, despite being the lord of death, is a very jovialdeity. His lightheartedness finds expression
through Bharani's play fulness and joyousness. It is up to Yama to weigh our actions in the present
life so that we can be assigned an appropriate new life. He is thus a benevolent deity and should not
be feared. Yama is only feared by those who fear death and those whose karmas are not good. yama
is privy to many of the secret functionings of Maya. Bharani also holds within itself the complete
understanding of the process of life, birth and death.
lali,thedarkanddestructiveformof ParuatLisoneofthethreemainfemininedeitiesupholding
our universe. Just like Yama, lGli is also considered a deity to be feared. Kali's function however is
just to kill the demons within and without. Her form has to be terriffing because the entities she
deals with are themselves cruel and fierce, Her involvement with this nakshatra implies that Bharani
is a sort of battle field between the opposing qualities of nature. It is here where the distinction
between right and wrong, good and bad, godly and demonic is made. The process of uprooting the
negative side begins' Bharani deals with extremes and in the process becomes the most extreme
amongst nakshatras.
Afuture d furrctionitrg:
'Extreme'is the one word which sums up Bharani's essential nature and functioning. It swrngs
between polar opposites like puritanism and bohemia, naievete and wisdom, mafurity and immaturity
and life and death. Bharani is representative of the desire aspect of nature. It is thus in a way a lust
for life and a fear of death. Bharani is a 16 year old girl on the verge of deflowering, a baby in the
womb or a person facing the Yamadutas (celestial angels whose task it is to guide souls through the
afterlife process) after one's death. Because of ib childlike quality Bharani is one of the most eager

[page 30]
24
nakshatras. Just like a child wants to experience all of its surroundings, Bharani natives have a desire
to experience their surroundings to the fullest. There is a primeval innocence in how they experience
things, people and places. They might go through instinct rather than r@son. Most of their feelings
and desires are so overwhelming that very little can be done to restrain or placate them. Once again
the evolutionary status of the soul in question comes into picture.
Evolved Bharanitypes would channeltheir immense primevalenergy into positive and wholesome
universal pursuits, while the less evolved types will be akin to a moth madly hopping about from one
light source to another. In the present day and age where confusion and chaos reign supreme,
Bharani can be a very difficult ercrgy to handle. This can be easily understood through the mental
dilemmas and naievetes which young girls and boys go through after puberty.Wthout proper guidance
and understanding, Bharani natives are ready to jump into anything and everything without caution
or consideration.
Bharani natives are often strong characters who can with#nd the many turbulences which life
has to offer. They do get down and moan and cry like infants sometimes, but nothing holds them
down for too long. They are often seen to undergo huge transformations and radical changes
throughout their lives. This comes about due to their longing for extremes. When they get set on a
path, they want to experience every aspect of it until they have exhausted all possibilities and have
no option left. hrt to tip over to something completely new. There's no set boundary in 'Bharani
..'universe'.
All Bharani natives have a creative urge inside them. The feminine sex usually expresses this
creativity through bearing children, while the male sex tries to be creaUve on odter levels. Bharani is
a nakshatra where the interplay between the male and female takes place. This makes it one of the
most sexual nakshatras of the zodiac. Bharani is representative of nature's force which creates
attraction between the opposites. Bharani natives experience, indulge in, fall prey to and try to
understand this force. Sigmund Freud, the famous psychoanalyst, had prominent Bharani placements
and it was no wonder then that he reduced every activity on the earthly plane to sexuality. However

[page 31]
25
the more evolved Bharani types realize that this force of attraction has more to do with love, harmony
and conscious unity. Sexuality is just one of its many expressions.
Bharani natives usually have large, expressive eyes, a prominent head, medium sized lips and
a spooky deathly smih. Their smile is their most distinguishable feature. It encapsulates all their
sexuality, mystery and the processes of life and death itself. Just like the sunset emanates a stillness
over nature, Bharani natives have the ability to put up a calm countenance, even if their insides are
a raging torment. Their childlikeness is quite helpful when it comes to exploration and learning, but
it makes for a distinct type of cruelty and morbidity. Everyone knows how children can be more cruel
than grown-ups on many different levels. Bharani's cruelty comes from a lack of responsibility for
one's own actions. It is very easy for Bharani natives to move from one action to the next without
caring about the longterm implications.
Bharani types are usually enthusiastic and energetic in their approach to life. They have a
strong sense of adventure in the fields they pursue. It is seen that they can only achieve their goals
if they are under constant guidance from a more mature and wiser source'
Modc of furctioning :
Bharani is considered to be a Balanced nakshatra. Bharani is in actuality an extreme nakshatra,
but it is classified as'Balanced'because of its tendency to balance opposing extremes like bifth and
death. Bharani natives often lead double lives, touching two different extremes. Thus on a whole,
their lives can be seen as balanced. Sunrise (conveying a sense of birth) or Sunset (conveying a
sense of death), which forms a paft of this nakshatra's symbolism (as seen in its image), is the time
when nature's energies are very delicately balanced. This is the reason why these times are seen as
the best time for occulVspiritual practices. Bharani, as we shall discover, carrbs a lot of occult
potential due to its relationship with the planet Venus.

[page 32]
26
Caste i
It belongs to the mltcha (outcaste) nakshatras. It is Bharani's tendency to go towards extremes,
which probably made the ancient Vedic seers classiff it as an outcaste. Bharani almost always tries
to break the social norms or taboos one way or the other. It is a highly explosive energy, which
cannot usually be controlled within any societal structure.
' Qenfer:
It is a Female nakshatra. This comes as absolutely no surprise as Bharani stands for all that is
feminine. It is the second nakshatra and the first feminine nakshatra. Just like the number'2' in
numerology, it is the initiator of the feminine principle on all levels of existence. It is the beginning
of duality and maya, and within it lies the essence of the complex functionings of the feminine
principle.
tsodyparc U t{umor (Aguraedic Constitution) :
The Head and Bottom Parts of the Feet are the body parts related to this nakshatra. It is
interestlng to note that in childbirth (a Bharani activity), it is either the head or feet which come out
of the womb first.
It is a primarily "pitta" (fiery) nakshatra. Since all of Bharani lies within the pitta sign of Aries,
this classification comes as no surprise. Bharani represents the original creative fire, which produces
the world of matter. It is its pitba quality which makes it very active on the material plane, despite its
eafthy bulkiness.
Direction
It is related primarily to the arc covering the directions east, south-east and south.

[page 33]
27
{Podas (@wrters) :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 13o 20' - 160 40' Aries falls in Leo Navamsa ruled by
Sun. The focus here is on creativity and self-immersion. Planets here can be extremely self-centric
and can often offend others without meaning to. The drive and will-power inherent in this pada can
be used for positive ends if the nativity as a whole allows for it. Sun, Mars & Jupiter are especially
strong in this pada.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 160 40' - 2Oo OO' Aries falls in Virgo Navamsa ruled
by Mercury. The emphasis here is on seryice and hardwork. Planets here function in an altruistic
way. A ceftain degree of organization is seen even in typically extreme and chaotic Bharani mode.
Mercury Mars and Rahu are better suited for giving good results here.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 20o 00' - 23o 20Aries falls in Libra Navamsa ruled by
Venus. The ability to relate and harmonize opposites characterizes this pada. There is however no
sense of any limits here when it comes to sex and relationships, which can be either a good thing or
a bad thing depending upon the evolutionary level of the nativity in question. Being a pushkara
navamsa pada it allows for fulfillment of one's desires. Mercury Venus & Rahu are best suited for
utilizing the energies of this pada.
The foufth pada or quafter of this asteris m 23o 20' - 26o 4l'Aries falls in Aries Navamsa ruled
by Mars, The energy here is extreme in every sense of the word. Planets here work in an uninhibite(
primeval fashion. It can be a highly inventive and original pada if its explosive energy can be channeled
properly. Sun, Mars & Kefu are strong here but may not always give beneficial results. Only the
natural benefics Jupiter and Venus are suited for utilizing the energies of this pada in a wise, non
self-destructive way.
ProJusions :
Babysitters, Nannies, Nursery School Teachers; All professions involving children; professions
connected with Amusement, Theme Parks; Children's Toys Industry; Gynaecologists; Midwives; All

[page 34]
28
professions connected with birth & death; Professions related to Fertility Clinics; Motticians; All
those connected with Morgues and Funerals; Coffin Makers; Obituary Writers; Officials handling
EtirBvDeah Records; Homicide Detectives; Dancers from all schools and styles; Tobacco, Coffee and
Tea Industry; Cooks, Caterers, Hoteliers; Professions connected to Slaughterhouses; Veteranarians;
Fire Fighters; Automobile Industry; Motor Sports; Stuntmen; Coal & Petroleum Industry; Heavy
Industries; Surgeons; Film & Entertainment Indusfiy; Photographers; Models; All professions involving
the use of sex and glamour; Exotic profussions; Sfip tease artists; Pomography Industry; ProstituUon;
Occultists &Tantrics using sexualenergies; Judges; Those in Elite positions requiring extreme secrecy;
Volcanic & Earthquake Experts; Geophysicists; Biologists & Microbiologists; Seed & Feftilizer Industry.
Q{acu :
Extreme Exotic Landscapes; Volcanoes; Areas with Volcanic Soil; Volcanic Tropical Islands like
Hawaii and Polynesian Islands; Farmlands; Kindergaftens, Nurseiies, Nursery Schools; Children Parks;
Amusement Parks; Morgues; Cemetaries; Funeral Homes; Maternity & Child Wards in Hospitals;
Intensive Care Units; Gynaeology Hospitals; Film & Photography Studios; Exotic Nightclubs; High
Courts; Fertillty Clinics; Streets and roads with busy traffic; All places connected with the above
mentioneC professions.
guna (Essente) and tattua (Ekment) :
It is supposed to be a fujask nakshatra. This can be easily assessed from Venus's rulership of
Bharani. Venus is seen as the most rajasic among planets. Its relation to the terrestrial lifu processes
is very strong, In a way it can be said that it is only Venus which makes life worth living. Since
Bharani heralds the Venusian energy, its expression here is primal, highly clnrged and explosive (all
rajasic expressions).
It belongs to the Eafttr element. Bharani can be said to represent the point in creation where
the fire element (spewed forth by Aswini) transmutes into the Eafth element. Bharani has evefihing

[page 35]
n
to do with the process of materialization. It is the force which puts a material sheath around the
astral body, so that it can experience the terrestrial plane. The earthy quality of Bharani can be easily
understood by the fact that its representative animal, the elephant, is the largest and heaviest land
animal.
Qana ('TWd t
It is considerd a Manusha or Human nakshatra. Bharani relates to the second and seventh
houses in a chart. These are the houses which sum up wlnt human life is about br most people.
One's paftner, family and resources are all what the common man cares about. These are the houses
of both life and death (2nd and 7h are the maraka (killer) houses). Venus is the karaka for both these
houses and togetlrer they convey Bharani's inbnse involvement in human affairs, whe$rer it be lift
or death.
Orientatint d Disposition :
It is Downward Looking nakshatra. This classification relates to the hidden aspect of Bharani,
As we have discussed earlier, evenb brewing up under Bharani's influence dm't corne to the surface
until the very last moment, Just like the act of sex or a foetus developing in a womb, Bharani likes to
keep its activities hidden from view of others.
It is a Fierce or Severe nakshatra. The intent behind this classification is clear from Bharani's
ruling deities. Yama and Kali are both fierce deities interested in jobs requiring fierce actions like
cutting the lifeforce of lifeforms against their will. Even the process of chihbifth (ruled by Bharani)
is a painful process. In fact it is considered b be the most painful experience amongst all naturd
processes on the earthly plane. 
__
a=.-

[page 36]
30
Lunar Montfi d Day:
It relates to the second half of the lunar month of Ashwin. This period usually falls in the
month of October in the solar calendar.
Bharani is also related to the Chatwtithi( 4th tithi or day) of the waxing and waning phases of
the Moon's monthly cycle.
Auspicious Actirtitits :
All Creative Activities are favoured; Good for Severe, Cruel, Destructive, Competitive or Warlike
activities; Sexual, Amorous & Procreative Activity; Fertility Rites & Agricultural Activities; Beginnings
& Endings; Gardening; Alltype of activities which require use of fire; Good for taking care of postponed
or neglected activities; All activities requiring spontaneity; Ascetic activities requiring self-discipline;
Fasting & other purificatory rites; Dealing with children
Inauspiri^ons Actioitits :
Most unfavourable for travel (Bharani relates to traffic jams and accidents); Not good forslow
& gentle activities requiring calmness or serenity; Not good for Initiations; In the present day & age
it is better for endings than beginnings.
e{anetary fot[er :
The main planets connected with this nakshatra are Mars and Venus. Mars is ruler of the sign
Aries, and Venus is the main planetary ruler of this nakshatra. Venus can be said to be born in
Bharani. As discussed in the Esoteric Section, Venus is a planet sirongly connected with birth and
renewai. Venus in Bharani acts as a'bringer of life'. In combination with Mars,which, being the ruler
of the sign Scorpio signifies death, Venus signifies the universal cyclic process of life and death on all
levels of existence,especially biological.

[page 37]
31
According to one school of thought both Mars & Venus are connected to the outer planet
Pf uto. Pluto has always been seen as the hidden, creative source and is equated with Shiua.In Greek
legends, it is supposed to hide in the underbelly of the earth and is responsible for the fertility of
earth. Mars & Venus are the two planets most concerned with feftility and interplay with the sexes.
Nowadays,it has become fashionable to associate men with Mars and women with Venus, but the
truth is that it is the male who creates the sperm (Venus), whib it is women who create and house
(Mars) the new born.
Conjunctions of Mars and Venus in a nativity carries an energy similar to that of Bharani.
Saturn reaches its maximum debilitation in this nakshatra. Bharani is the warm place of creativity
and fertility, while Saturn is a cold planet of obstruction and delay. It is easy to see how they don't go
together. Other planets usually do well in Bharani, as long as Venus has a refined placement in the
chatt
iloutek an[ Afpfra.he* :
The first pada or quafter of this asterism 13o 20' -16" 40' Aries corresponds to "Lee" as in
Liam.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 16o 40' - 20o 00' Aries corresponds to "Lu" as in
Lulu.
The third pada or quafter of this asterism 20" 00' - 23o 2O'Aries corresponds to "Lay" as in
Layla.
The fouftfr pada or quafter of this asterisrn 23" 20' - 26 40' Aries corresponds tO "Lo" as in
Logan.
In the Sanskit alphabet Bharani corresponG to "Eem" and consequently its mantra is "Om
Eem",
- -./Jr

[page 38]
32
SeretaI type an{ Compatihi[ity :
Its sexual animal is an Elephant. Elephants are slow moving and some what sensual creatures.
The elephant as a sexual animal represents elephantine appetites in sex. It is very hard for other
na$hatras, with the exception of Revati (the other elephant), to satisff Bharani. Bharani is the most
sexual amongst nakshatras and promotes sex in all its different forms. However in its extreme
aspect it can ihun sex completely or immerse itself in it to the point of perversion.
For sexual & marital compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the tables on pages 457
& 458.
Esoteric :
Most of Bharani's esoteric understanding can be arrived at from the study of the planet Venus.
Besides the Sun (which is a star and thus cannot be seen as a plbnet), Venus is the only planet which
periodically undergoes a process of birth and death.
The Mayan calendar was based on Venus's 584 day cycle, which it makes from being the
morning star to being the evening star. Venus illumines the skies as the morning star for a 236 day
period. After that Venus disappears for 90 days. It reappe.ars as the evening star for 250 days, and
then there is the second relatively brief disappearence of 8 days before it reappears in the east. This
makes a total of 584 days.
We can see that just like the Sun, Venus too rises in the in the east, to disappear in the west,
to one day reappear in the east. Because it dies and is born again, all ancient cultures saw Venus as
representing the rejuvenative principle. Its connection with the well spring of life is the reason why
Venus is considered an occult planet.
In Vedic texts Shukracharya, the preceptor of the Daityas (celestial demonic beings) and the
presiding deity of Venus, is supposed to be an adept at Sanjivini Vidya, the knowledge to raise the
dead to life. Even Brihaspati, the preceptor of the Deras (celestial godly beings) doesn't have this
knowledge, a fact which renders the Devas weaker in comparision to Daityas.

[page 39]
33
All goddesses, especially the fertility goddesses, are connected with Venus. The May Day
celebration on ls of May forms an integral part of the Celtic traditions. The interesting thing to note
is that Sun is transiting through Bharani on ls of May every year. This is why the Celts saw this as an
opportune time to practice fertility rites, just like the Mayans chose to do it in the 8 day disappearance
of Venus. One must realize that all cultures, which placed strong importance on Venus above all else,
had roots in the celestial Daitya lineages. The harsh and cruel behaviour of the Daitya race in Puranic
legends can also be understood from the cruel and severe nature of Bharani.
Birth and death are complementary processes, in the sense that every death is a beginning
and every birth is an ending. When a balance is achieved between birth and death the soul finds
easy evolutionary progress. However if the soul finds it hard to confront one or the other, severe
situations and turmoil are the result. Bharani is the nakshatra of karma and reincamation, one of the
least understood concepts in modern times, especially in the western world. Bharani is the name for
the stage where the masculine and the feminine, which have come out of a single genderless
source, copulate, and in doing so, carry forward the process of creaUon.
Qotra (Cetzstiat titwage) :
This nakshatra is related to the Sage Vashishta, one of the seven celestial sages looking after
the affairs of our galaxy. The name of this sage translates into "possessor of wealth", which is in
keeping with this asterism. Bharani has a tendency to be financially well off, as implied by the sage's
name. On the other hand, we can infer that this particular sage has a lot to do with life and death
processes within our galaxy, ..:,;J ,.
\emp[ial:
One good way of getting in touch with the energies of this nakshatra is to meditate on death.
Worship of Yama, the god of death and dharma is also helpful. However the best way to master the

[page 40]
a
energies of Bharani is through the worship of Kali, the dark goddess. Worship of any feminine deity,
especially fertility goddesses is also auspicious (especially for material gains).
Repetition of the root mantra of this nakshatra - "Om Eem" 108 times when Moon transits this
nakshatra and in its corresponding lunar month is sure to reduce suffering and bring enlightenment
into a person's life.
Persons who are benefitting from the positive energy of this nakshatra can also increase the
good effects through the above mentioned ways. It is helpful for them to wear mixtures of white, red
and black and generally dark shades. They should use its directions, lurar month and the days when
Moon transits Bharani to undertake all impoftant actions'
Eagnpfe :
Imetda Marcos, one of the richest women in Asia, has her Moon placed in Bharani. Bharani's
tendency to give material extremes is exemplified in her life. She became well known for her massive
shoe collection,whose number ran into thousands. She has also had her share of the harsh
transforrnative events, which Bharani brings into the lives of those it affects strongly.
Misceffancotts :
According to Varahamihira, Moon in Bharani natives are "resolute, resourceful, honest, healthy
and happy". nob Dylan, the famous singer-songwriter, also has his Moon placed in Bharani, and
Varahamihira's dictates seem to apply more in his case.
***

[page 41]
l. K;*iLu 26"+0' \nes - lo"oo'faurus

[page 42]
3.
Klittit<g.
(26o.40' Aries - 10o00' Taurus)
In tfu SkU '
Krittika, the seed of solar energy, is represented in the celestial firmament by a well known
group of seven bright stars huddled together in the star cluster of Pleiades. The ancient Vedic seers
saw these seven stars as forming a necklace and attached immense importance to their role in
gafactic affairs. These stars are known in modern astronomy as 27-Tauri (Atlas), Eta-Tauri (Alqone),
23-Tauri (Merope), t7-Tauri (Electra), 29-Tauri (Pleione), l9-Tauri (Taygeta) & 2l-Tauri (Maia).
Alcyone is the brightest among this group, with a visual magnitude of 2.88. These stars are very
easily visible in the night sky because of their close proximity to each other. In fact they stand out in
'the night sky more than any other object because of this uniqueness. In order to locate these stars
in the night sky, one has to focus in the region to the right of the the bright star Alpha-Tauri
(Aldebaran, belonging to the next asterism, Rohini).
Name :
"Krittika" translates simply into "The One Who Cuts" or in a plural sense "The Cutters". This
simple, direct and straght forward name is very much in keeping with the essential quality of this
asterism. 'The Cutters" here relates to a feminine aspect rather than a male aspect and as we shall
discover later, this asterism is related to the'seven Krittikas' (or the seven wives) of the seven main
sages looking after the affairs of our galaxy.

[page 43]
ffi
Synhot:
Its main symbol is an axe, razor or any sharp edged instrument like a blade or knife. This
symbolism obviously relates to ib name, which implies cutting and penetration. All sharp instruments
can be used for both constructive or destructive purposes. A knife, for example, can be used for
cutting vegetables or hurting someone. In the same way, Krittika's penetration can be used for
cutting through superficial layers of mental and emotional functionings. On the other hand, it can be
used for causing harm out of anger or enmity. In some cases, its destructive aspect is constuctive
from a universal point of view, especially when those at the end of the blade are crooked or evil.
A flame of any type is another widely used symbol for Krittika. This as we shall see in the next
section, relates to its association with Agni, the lord of the fire element.
Peacock is another alternative symbol of this nakshatra. The elaborately ornate feathers of the
male peacock relate to the exuberant martial nature of the masculine paft of this nakshatra.
A peacock is the chosen vehicle of the male ruling deity of this nakshatra (please refer to the image).
Krishna always wore a peacock feather on top of his head and his early life, under the care of his
foster parents, reveals the essence of this nakshatra (refer to the Deity Section).
Deity :
l@rttikeya, the commander of the celestial godly forces, is the primary ruling deity of this
asterism. He is one of the most prominent among ShivaSsons and was raised by the aforementioned
Krittikas (the seven wives of the seven celestial sages). As we can see the name "Krittika" and
"Karttikeya" have common roots, and it is automatically implied that Krittikas are the foster mothers
of a boy called Karttikeya. Thus this nakshatra is related to foster care and nurturing of all types.
The circumstances preceding lGrttikeyat bifth, as menUoned in Puranic texts, are as follows:-
"At one point in time, the gods had lost all of their territory to the demons, and in their
despera$on asked Lord'Shiva to help them. Shiva expressed his disability to interyene directly, but

[page 44]
3S)
promised that he would produce a son who would deal with their problems. There are many different
versions on how lGrttikeya was actually born (please refer to the Esoteric section for a common
version). However all texts agree with the fact that he was sent away to the Krittikas (Pleiades star
cluster) in order to hide him from the demons. The demons had come to know that this child was
born for destroying them and were searching all over to find him, so that they could destroy him
first, while he was still a baby. Hidden from everyone's eyes, the seven wives of the seven rishis tmk
care of lGrttikeya, and as soon as he reached boyhood, he fulfilled his purpose by destroying the
demonic forces and restoring the heavens to the gods."
If properly understood, all of Krittika's nature and functioning can be understood from the
above legend. Krittika relates to a sense of imminent danger, which leads to secrecy, seclusion and
hiding as a result. It relates to the care and nufturing of anything in ib young, delicate sbate and this
is the reason why Moon reaches its maximum exaltation in the second pada of this nakshatra.
Karttikeya's heroic valorous deeds are mirrored in its functioning is well.
Agni, the god presiding over the "fire" element in nature, is the secondary ruler of Kriftika.
Fieriness is definitely' required for the combative and militaristic nature of this nakshatra, as suggested
by the war general post of Karttikeya. The fire symbolism here can be interpreted at a variety of
levels. On a physical level it represents the digestive fire, which converts the food we eat into usable
energy. This makes Krittika an energetic and physically active asterism. On a mental plane, fire
relates to the ability of the mind to assimilate new knowledge. The mental fire constandy seeks
knowledge and experience in order to keep itself burning. This nakshatra therefore relates to curiosity
and an inclination to venture out into unknown areas.
On the astral and more subtle planes, fire relates to the purifoing principle in nature. It burns
away the karma from previous lives, so that a sense of unity with the original creative source may be
achieved.
Krittika, on an esoteric level, seryes the function of puriffing the soul through the fires of
knowledge and experience.

[page 45]
in
We must not forget the seven wives of the seven sages, as they represent the actual stars of
this constellation. Krittika is a semFmaternal nakshatra and all its maternal qualities come from
these seven women. These seven women can in a way be seen as the five senses, the mind and the
consciousness. Their child Kartikeya, then represents the limitless perceptivity of the innocent mind'
There are many legends associated with the reasons behind the separation of these wives frorn
their husbands (the seven celestial sages). We will touch upon one of these legends in the Esoteric
Section. In the meantime, we just need to acknowledge the fact that these seven wives trained and
educated baby lGrttikeya in the various systems of knowledge. This fact reveals the "educational"
and "institutional" aspect of Krittika. Krittika is a sort of celestial training ground or university, where
one receives training necessary to pursue one's life purpose.
A{ature A funrtioning :
It is clear that the English word'critical', has its roots in the sanskrit word'Krittika'and this one
word sets the tone for Krittika's basic nature and functioning. Krittika's piercing quality lends itself to
the criticizing and fault finding part of human nature. Krittika aims to get to the root of any action o'r
situation and consequently it comes across all the impefections, which often lie between the apparent
and the real. Krittika doesn't tolerate imperfections because it sees them as obstacles in achieving its
decidedly fixed goals.
planets placed in Krittika give one pointed action and fiery bursts of energy. They act in a
sudden and explosive manner. Krittika natives have a direct and straightforward approach and don't
like to beat about the bush. They usually have cutting and blunt manners which often offends or
intimidates those around them. One must however remember that Krittika natives are good at
putting up social graces and do not act in a cutting or sharp manner all the time' They do so only
when roused. They have an extreme temper, but it does not last for more than a few seconds'
Krittika exemplifies Sun's anger rather than Mar's anger. Sun's anger doesn't last for very long,
while Mar's anger lingers on with an avenging attitude. The King (Sun), does not need to stay angry

[page 46]
41
for long to declare war, while the Soldiers (Mars), who actually fight the battle, need susbained anger
to keep them interested in battles.
Krittika natives usually hide their caring, nurturing and maternal side beneath hard, stern
exteriors' Fire, despite its dangerous and destructive potential, cook our food, warms us up on a
cold day and helps make most of the things we require for a comfortable living. In other words fire
is what makes ciVilization possible. Going one step further, we find that Sun's fire makes lifie possible
on earth. This is the reason why Krittika natives are usually the life-sustaining element within their
social sphere' They like to support others around them through their warmth, independence and
will-power. In some cases this may be excessive and the result is similar to overcooked food. Krittika
natives can alienate those around them by their sharp tongue and nature even though they don,t
have any real malefic intent.
In the universal scheme of things, Krittika relates to "dahana shakti ', - the power of the astral
body to cut its ties with the physical body. Its symbolism has heat aOove anO tight below. This relates
Krittika to all the functions of fire - purification, cooking, melting, moulding etc. Fire also suggests
the creative potency of the nakshatra and itjs said to have a strong association with ttre Moon. In
this way the Moon represents a receptive field or channel through which the creative potential of the
Sun can unfold. Krittika only acts when it has some kind of direction to go in and so individuals with
the nakhatra prominent in their charts, have a peculiariy startling and sudden way of erupting when
their Krittika energy is activated. n
On a spiritual level this nakshatra can provide intense awareness and allows one the ability to
undergo eltreme forms of purification. On a spiritual level Krittika is forever devoted to cutting its
way along a clear path towards the development of one's true inner nature and therefore will slay
any obstruction, inner or outer which blocks ib path. when it is strong in a nativity it indicates
sudden transformations/ups and downs in life.

[page 47]
42
Mod.e of functionirg :
Krittika is considered to be an Active nakshatra. It is sacrosanct that the commander of the
celestial armies be anything but active. No matter which way one looks at Krittika, all one finds is
resgess activity, whether it be in the field of leadership, nurturing, education or battle.
Caste :
It belongs to the priestly or brahminicalcaste. One may have expected Krittika to be classified
as a khatriya, considering Karttikeya's heroic, warrior-like nature. The reason why the seers saw
thjs nakshatra as brahminical, is because of its intense involvement with learning, knowledge and
education. It is naturally philosophical, altruistic and concerned with purity.
Qendar :
It is a Female nakshatra. This classification obviously relates to the maternal nature of this
nakshatra, as exemplified by the seven wives of the seven sages'
tsodyparts d trtnnor (Ayrnrte[ic Constiwtion) :
Hips, Loins and the Crown of the Head are tlE body parts related to this nakshaJra. .;
It is a primarily "Kapha" (watery) nakshatra. Its kapha quality must arise from its relationship
with Venus, a primarily kapha planet. The fact that Moon, another kapha planet, finds maximum
exaltation in this nakshatra, re-emphasizes this. Its ruling deity, Karttikeya, is supposed to have a
lustrous body, which is normally associated with the kapha humor'
Directbn :
It is related primarily to the arc covering the directions from east, south-east to south.

[page 48]
zB
eadss (Qtarters) :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 26" 40' - 30o 00' Aries falls in Sagittarius Navamsa
ruled by Jupiter. This is a highly moralistic, generous and altruistic pada. There's a daredevil element
to this pada, which connects it to one type of military purs:it or the other. It is the explorer of the
zodiac. Planets here give a lot of will power, strength and stamina. Sun, Mars, Jupiter and Ketu are
especially strong here.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 00o 00' - 3" 20' Taurus falls in Capricorn Navamsa
ruled by Saturn. This pada also has a strong sense of ethics but its vision is more material rather
than mental or spiritual. Even its spirituality is expressed through matter. The emphasis here is on
arranging matter to create a nufturing and motherly environment. The maternal aspect of Krittika's
functioning is at its peak here. Natives under a strong influence of this pada get and provide sustenance
when it matters the most. Moon reaches its maximum exaltation in this pada. Mars and Saturn also
function strongly here. However Mar's placement here has more to do with receiving nourishment
rather than providing it.
The third pada or quafter of this asterism 3o 20' - 6o 40' Taurus falls in Aquarius Navamsa ruled
by Satum. This is also a humanitarian and altruistic pada. It combines futuristic visions and ancient
knowledge on a weave of fixed principles. The emphasis here is on 10s house significations like
oneb collective duty. This pada promotes all types of learning and can thus be called the university
of the zodiac. Since no planet gets debilitated in Aquarius, all planets can function well here relating
to their own specific domains.
The foufth pada or quarter of this asterism 60 40' - 10" 00' Taurus falls in Pisces Navamsa ruled
by Jupiter, This pada has the ability to manifest its deep sensitivity on a material plane. It promotes
groupwork of all types in a joyful, benevolent way. Planets here are more creative under group
situations. This is a Pushkara navamsa pada and so all planets are capable of conferring good results
here. Jupiter, Venus and Ketu can make the fullest use of the energies of this pada, while Mercury is
a liftle out of sorts here.

[page 49]
44
Qrofusioru :
Critics; Managers; Generals & People in authority positions; Technical professions in general;
Teachers; Educators; University related professions; Lawyers; Judges; Surgeons; Swordsmen; Fencers;
people who make swords, knives and other sharp instruments; Blacksmiths; Creative Arts involving
the use of ftre based processes; Jewellers and Glassmakers; All Military Professions; Police; Fire
Fighters; Explbsive Experts; Those who work in Foster Homes & Orphanages; Professions connected
to Rehabilitation of Addicts of all kinds whether it be related to drug addiction, smoking, alcoholism,
weight problems; Professions involved in promoting methods & techniques for Self-Improvement or
Self Assertiveness; Spiritual Teachers who promote strong purificatory measures or worship involving
the Sun or Fire; Professions involving fire like Fire dancers or Fire Sacrifices; Professional Dart
players or Archers; Barbers & Hairdressers; Tailors; Work involving use of needles like Embroiderers
or Vaccinators; Gold diggers & Miners; Cook of all varieties; Those who make clay objects like bricks
for building houses or ceramic objects; Furnace makers; Those who make Cooking Utensils or Trade
tools; All professions involving use of fire and sharp objects.
{P{acu :
places with hot climates; Deserts & Arid lands; Agricultural lands; Cattle ranches; Meadows;
Tropical forests; Volcanic areas; Military Bases & testing grounds; Government Buildings; Universities;
Rehabilitation Centres; Orphanages; Mines in general; Factories & Industrial areas using fire in one
form or the other; Fireplace, Furnaces, Heating devices within homes; all places connected with the
above menUoned Professions'
Qu.na (Essenre) an[ tattw"s (Et"enunt)j
Krittika is a Rajasic nakshatra due to its association with dynamic qualities like individuality,
projection, motivation, leadership and initiaUve.

[page 50]
45
It belongs to the Earth element. This doesn't come as a surprise because three fourths of this
nakshatra lie in the earth sign, Taurus. The fieriness of this nakshatra manifests itself through the
earth element. One way to understand this is to see Krittika as "cooked food". Krittika represents all
matter which is made useful in some way by the action of the fire elemeng just as food is made
palatable by the process of heating.
gana EWr) t
It is considered a nkhas or demonic nakshatra. Its demonic quality relates to its cold-blooded,
merciless approach to acts of violence like killing etc. It works by the "tit for tat" dictum and is
usually unforgiving.
OriBntatbn d Disposition :
It is a Downward nakshatra. In keeping with its penetrative nature, Krittika is always more
interested in what is below the suface. For example, in relation to our planet, Krittika would relate
to the fiery core, which keeps the surface in place. On a more personal level, one will find that the
latent fieriness of a Krittika native remains hidden, unless provoked by some external agency.
It is a Mixed nakshatra i.e. it alternates between sharp and soft. Ib sharper side is exemplified
by Karttikeya, who as the general of the celestial armies, indulges in sharp actions like attacks, wars
and battles. Krittika usually uses its sharper side for commanding purposes. Its softer side relates to
the nurturing and maternal qualities of the seven wives. (Please refer to the Deity section).
Lunar Montfi U Day :
It relates to the first half of the lunar month of lhrttika, which usually falls in late October, early
November.
i;. :.'*:tr:t ! . .r , ;.:+; t'.

[page 51]
46
Kriftika is also related tothe Shashti (6d1 tithi or day) of the waxing and waning phases of the
Moon's monthly cycle.
Attspbions Actiaitizs :
Fire worship; Purification rites; Giving up old habits; Making swift changes and sudden endings;
Acb requiring initiative, courage, leadership and executive ability; Making important decisions; Military
Activities and Interests; Debating; Standing up for oneself; Cooking; Sewing & Embroidery; Cutting;
Shaving; All activities involving the use of fire or hea! All mothering & nurturing activities; Good for
starting educational ventures; Good for commencing new ventures in general; Good for activities
requiring a sense of discrimination, honesty and frankness; Drumming & Percussion; Most activities
are favourabh in this nalshaba.
Inauspicious Actiaitics :
.,socializing; 
Diplomatic activities; Rest or relaxation; Water based activities.
etmctoty futer :
The Sun is the main ruler of this nakshatra, giving it a lot of energy, independence and power.
Sun's rulership indicates the penetrating insight, pride, ambition and self motivation which characterise
Krittika. Just like the Sun, Krittika goes on about its objectives in a straight and relentless fashion.
The first pada is co-ruled by Mars. The combined energies of the two military planets make it harsh
in its approach and functioning. It can ruthlessly conquer any obstacles or enemies that come in its
path. ...
The rest of the padas are co-ruled by Venus. Sun and Venus are natural enemies and thus the
Taurus part of Krittika has more to do with harmonizing the Apollonian and Dionysian extremes
rather than having a cutting no nonsense militant approach. It helps to understand that in Krittika

[page 52]
47
the solar energy is stronger in comparision to venusian energy and this is the reason why Moon
(Sun's Queen in the planetary hierarchy) gets exalted here. The dynamics between Sun and Venus
are not easy to understand. Venus is usually described as the hidden minister or the Queen's (Moon's)
minister in the planetary hierarchy and thus the King's (Sun's) relationship with it is obscure. Venus
however brings in love, caring and harmony into Krittika's hot, strict domain making it a more
balanced nakshatra. Sun and Venus are both creative planets which sffive fur knowledge and forms
the core of Krittika's functioning.
Sun/Venus, Sun/Mars conjunction or exchange in a horoscope carries energies similar to Krittika.
Sun, Mars and Venus usually give strong results here but as always alot depends on the pada they
occupy.
'loute{s anl Ahfrabe* :
The first pada or quafter of this asterism 26o 40' -30o 00'Aries corresponds to "A' as in Arden.
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 00o 00' - 03o 20' Taurus corresponds to "Ee" as in
Eagle.
The third pada or quafter of this asterism 3o 20' - 6o 40' Taurus corresponds to "Oo" as in
Uzbekistan.
The fourth pada or quafter of this asterism 6" 40' - 10" 00' Taurus corresponds to "Ay" as in
Elliott.
In the Sanskrit alphabet Krittika corresponds to uI", "Oou and "U" consequently its mantras are
"Om Im", "Om Oo" and "Om U".

[page 53]
48
Seryat'Type and Compatihility :
Its sexual animal is a Sheep or Goat, an animal which is seen as a rather passive creature,
however the Ram, the animal symbol of the sign Aries, is capable of much aggression and fighting
qualities when roused.
For sexual & marriage compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the tables on pages
4s7 & 458.
'F-soterb :
There are many stories relating to the birth of Karttikeya. One of them says that Karttikeya was
bom as a result of Shiva's sperm falling on earth. Shiva here can be equated with Sun and the
original masculine principle in the form of the sign Aries, while the eafth is represented by the sign
Taurus. This tale therefore suggests a mingling of these energies,'and Krittika, as we know, is the
nakshatra which bridges the signs Aries and Taurus, and is the initiator of solar energy. Krittika is the
point in creation where the Fire element converts itself into the Eafth element.
The star cluster Pleiades, which as we know represents Krittika in the skies, has been an object
of veneration since ancient times. It is the place where the seven wives (represented by the seven
brightest stars amqng the seventeen stars that are part of the Pleiades star cluster) of the seven
sages (represented by the seven stars of the constellation Great Bear) are supposed to reside. These
wives are supposed to be nannies to Shiva's younger son Karttikeya. lGrttikeya, as we know, is the
deity presiding over the planet Mars. This symbolism makes Krittika a harbinger and nourisher of the
Maftian energy. In fact it can be seen as a cosmic university of sorts where the souls with predominantly
Martian qualities are trained. This association with Martian energy is reinforced by the fact that
Krittika begins in Aries, a sign ruled by Mars. The fact that the remainder of this asterism lies in the
sign Taurus, representing earth itself, connects this asterism strongly with earthly activities.

[page 54]
/K)
Alot of ancient telts point towards a direct connection between Pleiades and evolution of life on
eafth. This relates to the benefic paft of this asterisrn as the nourisher and well wisher of life on
earth. This is why Moon is exalted in the first three degrees of Taurus, which are governed by this
asterism. We can see the last three quafters of this asterism as carrying the feminine principle
illustrated by the symbolism of the seven wives. Krittika is more or less the representation of the
feminine matrix of life. The first quarter of this asterism relates more to its martian aspect, as
illustrated by its symbolivn of Karttikeya.
Qotra (Cetzstiat Liruage) :
This nakshatra is related to the Sage Angiras, one of the seven celestial sages looking after the
affairs of our galaxy. The name of this sage translates into "the fiery one". The relaUonship between
Krittika and this sage is immediately clear from the name of the sage.
fumediat
For those suffering from bad effects resulting from afflictions to this nakshatra, the best remedial
measure is worship of Karttikeya. Worship of Sun along with the recitation of Gayatri mantra is also
helpful in bringing the best out of this nakhatra. Having a reverential attitude towards the seven
wives everytime one gets to see the constellation of Pleiades also helps.
Repetition of the root mantras of this nakshatra - "Om Im", "Om Oo" and "Om U" 108 times
when Moon transits this nakshatra and in its corresponding lunar month is sure to reduce suffering
and bring enlightenrnent into a person's life.
Persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this nakshatra can also increase the
good effects through the above mentioned ways. It is helpful for them to wear all bright fiery mlours
like gold, orange, red, yellow and variegated colours like those seen on peacock feathers. They
should use its directions, lunar month and the days when Moon transits Krittika to undertake all
important actions.

[page 55]
50
lE4nnpb :
Eua Braun, the girlfriend of Adolf Hitler, has her Zs lord Mars, placed in Krittika, signiffing her
partner would be a general. King James.I/of England, had his Moon placed in Krittika in his ninth
house. It is this moon which protected him in the 16 years of exile in a foreign land (9th house
signification). This exalted Moon was also one of the main factors which helped him regain his
kingdom when his Moon chart started working at the age of 32.
Misceffaneous :
According to Varahamihira, Moon in Krittika gives one "a bright appearance, fondness for
otherb spouses, extreme appetite and widespread fame". Varahamihira is right on target as far as
our example is concerned.
***

[page 56]
fi "'**' 'L'
+. Kohini I o"oo'faurus - Z)"7g, fau*s

[page 57]
4.
qefihli
(10000' Taurus - 23020' Taurus)
In tfiz Sky t
Rohini, the seed of lunar enqrgy, is represented in the celestial firmament by a very bright pale
rose star in the constellation of Taurus. This star is known in modern astronomy as Alpha-Tauri
(Aldebaran). Aldebaran is one of the brightest stars in the night sky, with a visual magnitude of 0.99.
In fact this unique pale rose star can even be spotted in the evening sky. The ancient vedic seers
revered this star because this was supposed to be the abode of Bnhrm and the Pral1patis.
frfume :
"Rohini" transfates into - the "Reddish One" or the "Growing One". The "one" here carries a
feminine tone and can be read as "celestial woman". The colour 'Red' evokes notions of warmth,
passion and liveliness. The fact that in ancient cultures it was seen as the colour of abundarrce and
prosperity, reveals some of the essential characteristics of Rohini. Its alternative names - Vidhi and
Wnnchi, a name which relates .to Brahna $he Geator among the Trinity) - reveal more sides of this
fascinating nakshatra.
Symhot:
Rohini's main symbol is an Ox-Caft pulled by Two Oxen. Oxen have been used as fertility
symbols by all ancient cultures. Even Taurus, tte sign representing'bounties of the earth', has a bull,

[page 58]
g
ox or cow as its symbol. In countries like India, where Vedic civilization flourished, an ox cart was
one of the only ways to transport various earth produces like crops over large distances. They serve
the same function which trucks serve in the present day and age.
Just as the ox-caft carries the harvested and ready to use produce, Rohini is supposed to be the
carrier of all the fruits of creation. Its relationship with the ox caft immediately suggests that it has
a lot to do with all aspects of agriculture, cattle rearing and all other activities involving material
produce. The "carrier" aspect of the ox-caft relates Rohini to all kinds of conveyances. An ox-cart is
a very earthy symbol and as a matter of fact, Rohini is the most materialistic amongst the nakshatras.
In ancient times ox-cafts were the "wheels of commerce". Thus in the present day and age, Rohini
relates to all kinds of commerce and financial dealings.
All the qualities normally associated with oxen like steadiness, fixidity and ability to romp over
anything which comes in its way, find expression through Rohini. As a result of the ox caft symbolism,
Rohini relates to the'development of agriculture'and therefore'civilization' itself. All the qualities
normally ascribed to the sign Taurus such as - eafthiness, fixidity, stability, creativity, productivity,
material security, acquisitiveness, refinement, accumulating, luxury loving, indulgence, idealism in
love, beauty and relationships - are mostly derived from Rohini's essential qualities.
Deity :
Bmhm4 the creator among the governing Trinity of the universe, is the main presiding deity of
Rohini. There are only three nakshatras which have one of the Trinity as its main presiding deity.
This says a lot regarding the impoftance of this nakshatra, especially in regards to the affairs of
Bhutolca (the eafthly realm).
There are a lot of legends connecting Brahma to this nakshatra. The main legend relates to an
earlier point of time in the history of the universe, when Brahma, after creating a daughter named
Rohini, fell in love with her. From the Vedic point of view, every constellation is seen as a feminine
goddess entity. Rohini's extraordinary charm and magnetism is made clear by the fact that Moon,

[page 59]
55
whose duty it is to spend only a certain amount of time with each of these feminine figures in his
monthly travel through the zodiac, at one point, refused to leave Rohini's abode. So it is not hard to
see why Brahma fell for her and pursued her, despite the stigma attached with engaging in "cosmic
incest"! However, he was stopped short in his chase by Shiua and had to be satisfied with just having
the rufership of this nakshatra (please referto the Esoteric Section of 'Ardra').
From this story it is clear that Rohini is the most alluring amongst all nakshatras. lust as money
in the present day world spins people around, Rohini makes people and even Gods chase after it in
every which way possible. Rohini relates to the wish-fulfilling creative aspect of nature, embodied by
goddesses of prosperity like Laxmi, the spouse of Vishnu. Due to its association with Brahma, it has
the ability to create anything which constitutes'prosperity'and 'abundance'on any plane of existence.
All Brahma does is "create, create and create" and the same is the case with Rohini. It is thus not
hard to see that its seruices are much in demand in all the lokas(planes of existence). Rohini is that
impoftant productive aspect of Maya, which keeps the game of lifsworth playing for those involved.
Afature (t funrtioning :
Rohini is the harbinger of agriculture and consequently "civilization", as we understand it. It is
a very productive nakshatra which supports all type5 of growth. The growing of plants when we put
seeds into the eafth is a Rohini process. Rohini relates to the production of all types of amenities
required for civilized living. When working through its higher plane, Rohini is only interested in use
of producLs derived directly from nature. In its low aspect it indulges in all types of chemical, synthetic
and man made products. The evolved Rohini types are usually true environmentalists and
conservationists, while the lesser evolved ones promote unwholesome products like those of the
present day cosmetic industry.
Rohini natives usually have large, clear and expressive eyes, refined feminine features, thick
lower lip and a smiling countenance. They have a stable, eafthy and well balanced way about them.
They are as unresponsive to external stimuli as a cow. They only'open up in extremely intimate
situations. Their unflinching quality often comes out as stubbomness. Despite their calm exteriors,

[page 60]
rc
ttrey can be very expressive with their voice and gestures. They can act well, whenever necessary.
They are smooth talkers and have gentJe, seductive mannerisms.
They seek attention and more often than not are able to get it. They are extremely popular
within their social circle because of their.charisma. They often use their charm and social ease for
manipulating situations to suit their own ends. This is obviously a good thing if their personal ends
are in line with universal ends, but when this is not the case, they can be the most selfteruing of all
people. It is very easy fior them to gain the trust of others, and in the present day and age, this is
gften used to derive some sort of material benefiL
They are both sexually alluring and indulgent at the same time. On the whole they have simplistic
personalities. This makes them appear dull and boring to those natives who are ruled by more
compfex nakshatras. ln lhli-Yugathey often turn out to be plain materialists and sensualists. Rohini
natives are always very concerned about being constructively productive in one way or the other.
They want to be of use to their home, community or the world in general depending upon their level
of soul functioning. The essential fertile nature of Rohini helps them achieve their goals without
much fuss.
Rohini always facilitates the materialization of one's thoughts and desires. This ability to give
expression to feelings and thoughts makes it artistic. Rohini is a true patron of the arts; and therefore
the level of artistic sensibilities at any given point of time among the collective, defines the level
where Rohini is working from. These days when the standards in arts have declined to really putrid
or abominable levels, one can easily see that Rohini is working through its lower, baser expression in
the majority of the PoPulace.
Rohini natives have a tremendous fixidity of purpose and persevere until their will is done' They
usually have strong family values and tend to support those within their close circle. It is not possible
for those outside their inner circle to hold their attention for long as they are very quick to spot
weaknesses in others. Despite their naturally fixed nature, they like to quickly flit through people
when it q)mes to social and communal interactions. When working through their lower natures,

[page 61]
Rohini natives are cool and suave oppoftunists who have a knack for extracting favours and financial
support from others.
Rohini natives are usually conseruative to a degree, but at the same time are open to new
influences. The word'conseruative'is used here in all its implications. The conservation part of their
nature comes out strongly when it comes to preserving the body. Rohini is very strrongly related to
the life force within us. Most natives with a prominent Rohini are usually very careful about their
health and live up to a ripe old age. In younger souls Rohini can cause a fear of death and dislike for
the ageing process. Th.e mantra of Rohini is to - create, create and create. Natives with Rohini
aonnected to the 5h house in some form like to have lots of progeny.
common english words like "robust", "romantic", "rom@", "rosy", "rose" seem to havg the
same root as the word "Rohini". All these terms give us clues to Rohini's functioning at different
levels, especially in regards b the matter of enjoyment. Rohini is one of the most enjoyment-
oriented nakshatras. It believes in making the most of the good things in life.
In the universal scheme of things, Rohini relates to "rohana shakti"or the power to make things
grow. Its symbolism has plants above and water below. This is obviously a representation of the
feritility aspect of nature. Rohini is the force which makes possible the materialization of the astral
impulses.
Modz, of funttUnhg :
Rohini is considered to be a Balanced nakshatra. Those who are involved in any productive
activity will understand the importance of balance in achieving desired results. Just as nature is
creative and productive through the balance of heat and cold, light and dark, rain and shine, winter
and summer ek. , Rohini is methodical and balanced in its actions. In its negative aspect howwer;
Rohini, like other balanced nakshatras, makes one go through life with the least amount of adventure
possible. It can be ultra-conservative and reluctant to try new things which add to its wisdom and
experience. On the positive $de, it knows how to stay within the assigned life path, withor.t unneoesary
strain.

[page 62]
58
Caste :
It befongs to the shudra caste. It may surprise some that Rohini is assigned this lowly caste.
One has to understand that Rohini relates to the 'salt of the earth' people who are involved in
activities directly dealing with the earth. Farmers (those who actually work in the fields) and
construction workers, were all seen as belonging to the shudra caste in ancjent times'
Qen[cr :
It is a Female nakshatra. Its association with the two feminine planets Moon and Venus make
Rohini a primariV feminine energy.
It is also the fourth nakshatra and the number 4 represents the mothering principle in nature.
Rohini is the asterism most related to the Earth, which is seen as a feminine entity in all ancient
cultures.
tsodgpats d ,rtmor (Ayu-nedic Constitution) :
The Forehead, Ankles, Shins and Calves of the Legs are the body parts related to this nakshatra.
It is a p6marily "Kapha"(watery) nakshatra. This stems from its association with two primarily
kapha planets, Moon and Venus. Among the three humors, kapha is most closely related to the earth
element. This automatically makes Rohini a kapha nakshatra.
Direction :
It is related primarily to soutft, south east and north west.

[page 63]
59
eadns (Qnrters) :
The first pada or quafter of this asterism 10o 00' - 13o 20' Taurus falls in Aries Navamsa and is
ruled by Mars. Pmsions and carnal nature are heightened here. The focus is on indulgence and
extravagance. Planets here want quick-fire material results. Only a well placed Sun and Mars do well
here. In its higher aspect this pada can make one a spiritual warrior fighting against exploitation on
a material plane: On that level it is a puriffing energy which combines spirituality with matter without
differentiation.
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 13o 20' - 16" 40' Taurus falls in Taurus Navamsa
ruled by Venus. This pada best exemplifies all what Rohini stands for. Planets here usually give
abundance and ability to conjure up required resources in the worst of conditions. The native however
may tend to suffer from extreme materialism. This pada allows one to give expression to their
thoughts and feelings through material means. Being a Var,gottama pada it gives very strong results.
This is the strongest pada in the zodiac when it comes to actualiz'ation and fulfillment of desires.
Moon, Mercury Venus and Saturn are especially strong here.
The third pada or quafter of this asterism 160 40' - 20" 00' Taurus falls in Gemini Navamsa ruled
by Mercury, The focus of this pada is on arts, sciences and business. It is the most flexible and
shrewd amongst Rohini's padas and has the power to accumulate wealth equivalent to the second
pada. This is a lightheatted and jovial pada and has less chances of getting stuck on purely material
issues in comparison to the previous pada. Mercury Venus and Saturn give strong results in this
pada.
The foutth pada or quarter of this asterism 20o 00' - 23o 20'Taurus falls in C-ancer Navamsa
ruled by Moon. The focus here is on home and material security. Money comes in through short
travels. Planets placed here have a maternal quality to them but can get excessively possessive and
narrowminded. A lot of the worst qualities of Rohini like unnecessary hoarding are relayed through
this pada. Only a well placed Moon or Jupiter function well here.

[page 64]
60
lhofessions :
Farming; Agriculturists of all types; All professions relating with growing, processing and handling
food; Botanists; Herbalists; Artists; Musicians; Enteftainment and Leisure Industries; Fashion &
Cosmetic Industry; Beauticians; Sex Therapists; Jewellers; Gemstone Dealers; Interior Decorators;
Bankers and Financiers; Transpoftation Business; Tourism Industry; Automobile Industry; Oil &
Petroleum Industry; Teltile Industry; Shipping Industry; Food Production, Packaging & Distribution
industry; All professions connected with Aquatic products and Liquids of all types.
{Ptaces:
Farms, Orchards, Gardens, Agricultural Estates, Places where herbs grow; Bus Stations, Train
Stations & Shipping Yards; Ponds & Swimming Pools; Banks & Financial Institutions; Marketplaces;
Bars, Restaurants, Hotels; Tourist ResorG; Studios for creative arts of all kinds; Places where gemstones
are founds; All places connected with the above professions.
Qurw ('Esserce) and tottuta (Ekment) :
It is supposed to be a Rajasbnal<shatra. This classification is obvious considering the materially
productive quality of this nakshatra. The fact that it is related to Moon and Venus, two primarily
rajasic planets, settles the issue.
It belongs to the Earth element. This is an obvious classification considering Rohinifalls completely
within the earth sign of Taurus. We have already touched upon its earthy quality many times throughout
this chapter.
9*a $ype) :
It is considered a Manusha or human nakshatra. Rohini's earthy quality and its association with
agriculture and civilization makes it strongly involved in human affairs. It represents earth's bounties

[page 65]
61
without which human beings cannot surive. It is the nakshatra which most strongly suppofts human
life.
Orientatbn 6 Disposition :
It is an Upward nakshatra. If we recall, one of the translations of Rohini's name is "the growing
one". Thus it relates to all things which grow upwards like crops and buildings. We have already
stated that any activity stafted in this nakshatra experiences growth, increase and expansion.
Itisa dhruva(fixed or permanent) nakhatra. Its fixed nature is best exemplified by the behaviour
pattern of oxen, its main animal symbol. Its permanence relates to the defined quality of nature,
which ensures that the trees bear fruit every growing season and that the rivers flow from their
source to the sea. In modern times, nature has become unreliable to an extent, only due to the
destructive functionings of mankind. Still, she can be more or less relied upon to sustain the six
billion of us. :
Lunar Montfi d Datt :
Rohini relates to the second half of the lunar month of lGrttil@, which usually corresponds to
the month of November in the solar calendar.
Rohini is also related to the Dvitiya ( 2nd Uthi or day) of the waxing and wqqng phases of the
Moon's monthly cycle.
Auspicious Actiaitits :
:
Extremely favourable for initiating activities of all types; Favourable for farming activities like
planting, sowing; Trading & financial dealings of all types; Good for marriage; All healing & self-
improvement measures; Nature exploration and favelling in general; Beginning consffuction; Romance
and sexual activity; Putting the material world in order; Purchase of clothes, jewellery automobiles
etc.

[page 66]
62
Inauspitious Actiaitips :
Not unfavourable for any action except those related to death, demolishing and destruction.
efarutory fu.fpr :
Moon and Venus are the two planets connected with Rohini. Moon is Rohini's main planetary
ruler. The lunar energy imbues Rohini with primordial feminine energy. Venus is also related to
shakti, the universal feminine force. The confluence of two feminine planets make Rohini a portal for
material expression of shakti.
Moon's natural grace, nufturing ability and maternity combines with Venusian charm, creativity
and productivity to make Rohini one of the most fruitful nakshatras. It is the most feminine amongst
all the nakshatras and therefore the most receptive and productive. Just like Mother Eafth, it provides
for all without bias. In the present times however, Rohini is exploited, just as women and Mother
Earth in general are exploited at the hands of dark forces which rule our planet. Rohini's bountifulness
has been exploited to extreme levels through unbounded greed. This is the reason why most of the
eafth is polluted and most of the women troubled and unhappy. The ruling forces of the planet
deliberately corrupt the feminine principle through the use of media.
Moon-Venus conjunction carries energy similar to Rohini. Moon, Mercury Venus and Saturn
express themselves strongly when placed in Rohini.
iloutek and Ahfiabets :
The first pada or quafter of this asterism 10o 00' -13o 20'Taurus corresponds to "O" as in
Omega.
The second pada or quarter of this a$erism 13o 20' - 16o 40' Tautus corresponds to "Va" as in
Value.

[page 67]
63
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 160 40'. - 20o 00' Taurus corresponds to "M" as in
Victor.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 20" 00' - 23 20'Taurus corresponds to "Vu" as in
Wood.
In the Sanskrit alphabet Rohini corresponds to "Rm" and "Lrm" consequently its mantras are
"Om Rrnl'and "Om Lrm".
Seryrat'Typt *d Compatihility :
" 
: i*, .a4:lr:a;
Its sexual animal is a Cobra. This makes Rohini exhibit serpent qualities in sexual union. The
srpas (celestial serpent beings) are regarded as being adepts at sexual activity. In fact Rohini is
supposed to be the most sexually adept among all nakshatras. This is probably the reason why the
Moon god was not ready to leave Rohini's abode. The representative joddess figurine of this nakshatra
is supposed to be the master of all thifi-two principles of sexual union. Rohini is most compatible
with Mrigashira, the other serpent nakshatra.
For sexual & marital compatibility with other nakshatras, please refer to the tables on pages
468 & 469.
T.soterk. i. , r, ;,...,
Since Rohini is the foutth nakshatra, all the qualities normally associated with the number'4'in
Numerology form the basis of this nakshatra's universal role. '4' is the number of structure and
concreteness. The material universe takes form under the energies of this nakshatra. The fire of
Krittika is transformed into the eafth element. In the language of physics we can say that pure
energy condenses to form physical atoms, molecules etc. Rohini is representative of Brahma3power
to tum energy into mass (tangible matter).

[page 68]
a
In the modern day Tarotpc( the fourth card called "The Empress" represents Rohini's role in
the game of life, as the "Great Fruitful Mother Goddess" representing fertility, warmth, passion and
abundance. She is supposed to represent Maia as she creates an earthly or material paradise. Rohini
therefore can be seen as a channel through which the divine expresses itself through matter.
It is interesting to note that "The Empress" card carries the symbol of Venus, a planet very
strongly conneCted with Rohini. The truth of the matter is that the word 'Tarot" is derived from the
word 'Taro", which in turn comes from the Sanskrit term 'Tara" meaning "Star". All the 21 cards of
the Major Arcana in this pack have been derived from the 21 main attributes of the great mother
goddess "Tara" or "Jagdamb" in charge of universal affairs. .;'"
We all have to admit that pleasure and enjoyment on varying levels is the basis of the game of
life. If it wasn't for Rohini, the universal mind would have a hard Ume sustaining the drama of life, as
very few souls would be willing to play it.
Qotra (Cetzstlat Lircage) :
This nakshatra is related to the Sage Atri, one of the seven celestial sages looking after the
affairs of our galaxy. The name of this sage translates into "one who consumes". Atri seems to be a
sage with a dual nature. He has rulership over two creative nakshatras and two destructive nakshatras.
Rohini obviously relates to his productive side. From another point of view, Rohini can be seen as a
devouring nakshatra, in the sense that it consumes souls through its excessive materblisrn.
futnedinl :
Reverance towards cows, earth and nature in its various forms is the best way to get on the
right side of Rohini's energy. Worshipping Brahma, its presiding deity, is not sanctioned by Vedic
texts. Brahma is under the curse of Shiva, which doesn't allow for his worship on the earthly plane.

[page 69]
63
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 160 40' - 20o 00' Taurus corresponds to "M" as in
Victor.
The foufth pada or quafter of this asterism 20" 00' - 23o 20'Taurus corresponds to "Vu" as in
Wood.
In the Sanskit alphabet Rohini corresponds to "Rm" and "Lrm" consequently its mantras are
"Om Rm" and "Om Lrm".
Seryat'Type an^d Compatihi[itg :
Its sexual animal is a Cobra. This makes Rohini exhibit serpent qualities in sexual union. The
sarrys (celestial serpent beings) are regarded as being adepts at sexual activity. In fact Rohini is
supposed to be the most sexually adept among all nakshatras. This is probably the reason why the
Moon god was not ready to leave Rohini's abode. The representative joddess figurine of this nakshatra
is supposed to be the master of all thirty-two principles of sexual union. Rohini is most compatible
with Mrigashira, the other serpent nakshatra.
For sexual & marital compatibility with other nakshatras, please refer to the tables on pages
468 & 469.
T-sotzrk :
Since Rohini is the foutth nakshatra, all the qualities normally associated with the number'4'in
Numerology form the basis of this nakshatra's universal role. '4' is the number of structure and
concreteness. The material universe takes form under the energies of this nakshatra. The fire of
Krittika is transformed into the earth element. In the language of physics we can say that pure
energy condenses to form physical atoms, molecules etc. Rohini is representative of Brahma3power
to turn energy into mass (tangible matter).

[page 70]
65
Repetition of the root mantras of this nakshatra - "Om Rm" and "Om Lrm" 108 times when
Moon transits this nakshatra and in its corresponding lunar month is sure to reduce suffering and
bring enlightenment into a personb life.
Persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this naKhatra can also increase the
gmd effects through the above mentioned ways. It is helpful for them to wear all reds, whites,
crdmes and bright pastel shades. White fabrics with flower designs are suitable. They should use its
directions, lunar month and the days when Moon transits Rohini to undertake all important actions.
E4gntp[z :
Krishna, VishnuSSh incarnation, was born with both hisAscendantand Moon in Rohini. Most
Indians are aware of Krishna's personality and life and can therefore easily relate his life with Rohini's
functionings. Krishna was known for his beautiful eyes, strong personal magnetism and the ability to
find material manifestation of all his thoughts and desires.
Queen Victoria, the lady who was seen as the crowning monarch of 75o/o of the eafth, was also
born with both her Ascendant and Moon in Rohini. In her case the expansive and acquisitive material
aspect of Rohini is brought to light.
Misce[faneous :
According to Varahamihira, those born with Moon in Rohini are "honest, pure, beautiful, have
steady minds and pleasant speech." This applies to Krishna totally and to a certain extent to Victoria
as well.
***

[page 71]
{- 
\,
&
t
a
\i
,\ /. -..-l
d
.& 'i
ftr I
l,l tr.\n I tY -V,. I
*'l
nr,o { t
.F 
'"/
ir
,.'C"
^
u
ffIY
\y
v
€
ii
"c.**
5. l$rlgshira zr"zo' f.urus - 6"+0'$enini

[page 72]
il
In the modern day TarotpcK the foufth card called 'The Empress" represents Rohini's role in
the game of life, as the "Great Fruitful Mother Goddess" representing fertility, warmth, passion and
abundance. She is supposed to represent Maia as she creates an earthly or material paradise. Rohini
therefore can be seen as a channel through which the divine expresses itself through matter.
It is interesting to note that "The Empress" card carries the symbol of Venus, a planet very
sffiongly conneCted with Rohini. The truth of the matter is that the word "Tarot" is derived from the
word 'Taro", which in furn comes from the Sanskrit term 'Tan"meaning "Star". All the 21 cards of
the Major Arcana in this pack have been derived from the 21 main attributes of the great mother
goddess "Tara" or "Jagdamb" in charge of universal affairs . -. .: ,,
We all have to admit that pleasure and enjoyment on varying levels is the basis of the game of
life. If it wasn't for Rohini, the universal mind wonld have a hard time sustaining the drama of life, as
very few souls would be willing to play it.
Qotra (Cetutiat Linzage) :
This nakshatra is related to the Sage Atri, one of the seven celestial sages looking after the
affairs of our galaxy. The name of this sage translates into "one who consumes". Atri seems to be a
sage with a dual nature. He has rulership over two creative nakshatras and two destructive nakshatras.
Rohini obviously relates to his productive side. From another point of view, Rohini can be seen as a
devouring nakshatra, in the sense that it consumes souls through its excessive materialism.
fumediat :
Reverance towards cows, eafth and nature in its various forms is the best way to get on the
right side of Rohini's energy. Worshipping Brahma, its presiding deity, is not sanctioned by Vedic
texts. Brahma is under the curse of Shiva, which doesn't allow for his worship on the earthly plane.

[page 73]
5.
gvhigasfi.iro
(23020'Taurus - 6040' Gemini)
In tfie Sky ,
Mrigashira, the initiator of Martian ene4ry, is represented in the celestial firmament by a bright
star and three not so bright stars in the constellation of Oion. The*, stars are known in modern
astronomy as Pi2'Orionis, Pi3-Orbnis, Pi4-Orionis& Gamma-Orionisi**t ,rl Bellatrix is the bright
star among them, with a visual magnitude of 1.66. It is easy to locate, as Orion is one of the most
prominent and easily noticeable constellations in the night sky. Bellatrix is the bright star at the top
right hand corner of Orion, while the three faint stars can be seen aligned in a bowlike formation a
little away on the right hand side of Bellatrix. The ancient vedic seers however saw these stars to be
forming a deer's head and we would soon know "why".
Abnu :
"Mrigashira" translates into - the "Deer's Head", One can immediately see the correlation between
the shape formed by its stars and its name. The legend behind this name is dealt with later in the
Esoteric Section. One can also make an obvious inference that this asterism's nature and quality
should be akin to that of a deer. Its other names - gumya meaning "benevolent" or relating to Soma
(Divine Nectar), Arghayanimeaning "start of the year", Chandra meaning Moon and tJdup, which
also is another name for Moon; each reveal a paft of Mrigashirab functioning, as will shall discover
in the course of our exploration.

[page 74]
70
Sym6o[ :
Its main symbol is a Deer. Some scholars choose to have a deer's head as its symbol, as is
literally apparent from its name. The association with a deer makes this nakshatra possess all deer
like qualities such as timidity, lightness, fragility, fickleness, wandering etc. The deer is seen as a
primarily lunar animal. In all ancient Vedic texts, deers are associated with gentle aspects of nature
and often pla'y major roles in romantic lores. Deers are portrayed as elusive, magical, divine and
enchanting creatures.
In the Vedic epic of Ramayana, it was a magical deer (actually a demon posing as a deer), that
caught gta3 attention; and her craving to possess it resulted in the disruption of her and Rama's
marital felicity. This is the reason why Mrigashira is associated with problems in married life through
illusion, undue suspicion or plain misunderstanding. The readers can refer to the Ramayana for the
complete story. There are other legends associated with the deer aspect of this nakshatra. We will
cover the most important among them in the Esoteric Section.
Deers have a constant searching and seeking quality about them, which forms the essence of
this nakshatra. As most hunters know, deers often roam around predictable trails. Thus this nakshatra
is related to all types of defined travel by road, air etc. Deers more often than not like to be in scenic
habitats. Simihr$ this nakshatra feels comfortable only in scenic surroundings.
Its afternative symbol is a'pot full of Somal Soma is the preferred drink of the gods. It is a kind
of celestial nectar associated with the Moon. In fact Soma is one of the sanskrit names of the Moon'
As we shall discover later, Moon has a strong connection with this nakshatra.
Deity :
The main deity of this nakshatra is the Moon. All the primary qualities of the Moon-inconstancy,
fickleness, changeability, tenderness, persuasiveness, gentleness, sensuality, perceptivity - apply to
this nakshatra

[page 75]
71
This nakshatra relates the most to the "Soma" aspect of Moon. Moon is known by many names,
each reflecting a different aspect of its functioning. As we discussed earlier, Soma represents the
nectar aspect of Moon. Moon is the ruler of all kinds of fluids on the material as well as astral plane.
Fluids in turn are the essence of life, which we can obserue through the functioning of our own
bodies. As we know our physical bodies are comprised of more than 600/o water and are biologically
alive only because of the circulation of vital juices. The physical counterpaft of mind, the brain, is
also dependant upon the transmission and interaction of fluids for its functioning. Moon, in its Soma
aspect, is related to this essential lifeforce on the physical, mental, etheric and astral plane. This
nakhatra thus relates to our life force and vitality through the presence and circulation of these vital
fluids.
Moon relates to the feminine aspect of nature, a fact which connects this nakshatra directly to
the feminine goddess energy. Ancient vedic seers saw this nakshatra as a seat of Shakti(the primordial
goddess energy). In fact, Paruati, the wife of Shiva and one of the-three main representatives of
universal Goddess energy, is the main presiding deity of this nakshatra. It is her own personal
nakshatra, as can be gauged from the fact that ancient texts say that her Moon is in Mrigashira. All
her qualities like benevolence, charm, changeability, compassion, playfulness and joyousness are
relayed through this nakshatra. Her timidity and gentleness is not to be confused with cowardice, as
she can be very strong, unyielding and wrathful if necessary. Her fierce forms like Durga and l@li
illustrate this fact. Most scholars usually neglect the fixed, strong willed and wrathful aspect of this
nakshatra. The name "Paryati" tanslates into "she who has many pafts". This translation exemplifies
the multifarious, multifaceted persona of Mrigashira.
Moon in its Soma aspect, is an indulgent character with hundreds of romantic liaisons. He is
often seen getting into trouble due to his afhirs with other's wives. According to one very famous
fegend, Mercury was produced out of the union of Moon with Jupiter's wife, Tara.In a way this story
can be seen as the birth of intellect (Mercury), as a result of the union of mind and wisdom. Intellect
is a more conscious force, which governs over the largely unconscious mind. In the universal scheme
of things, mind couldn't have just been by itself without a gorcrning faculty for long.

[page 76]
72
fufoane U functbning :
The essence of the nature and functioning of Mrigashira can be summed up by one word -
"searching". This searching can have any level or aspect to it - it can relate to Mrigashira's ruling
deity Parvati searching for her perfect spouse; a spiritual aspirant searching for true knowledge; or
a soul searching for new mental, emotional or physical experiences.
Mrigashira is the most curious amongst all nakshatras and thus makes one seek new areas of
experience. This aspect of Mrigashira is very similar to that of the planet Rahu (please refer to the
author's previous work ''fhe Rahu-Ketu Experience" Sagar Publication, New Delhi; 'The Key Of Life'
Lotus Press, USA for a comprehensive understanding of the nature and functioning of Rahu). This
seeking brings contentment, fulfillment and enlightenment only when it is in keeping with one's life
purpose. In other cases, it only brings about temporary satisfaction, which usually gives way to
sorrow and disillusionment.
This seeking quality, however, makes Mrigashira natives good at artistic pursuits of all types. On
a higher level, Mrigashira may allow one to find one's life path or destiny and on a lower level, it can
just make one prance about like a deer from one transitory experience to the next. This is akin to a
person in a deseft chasing one mirage after the other. This negative quality gives rise to many other
negative traits like fickleness, inconstancy and superficiality. Mrigashira natives often have to learn
to stick at a thing until some sort of completion is achieved.
The whole emphasis of .Mrigashira is on the mental rather than the physical. Mrigashira natives
usually have great dexterity of mind, which gives them the ability to grasp various subjects with
effortless ease. They have a great capacity for all types of mental work, but they often stretch
themselves, and as a result suffer from mental and neruous exhaustion. They usually need a lot of
clean air and physical exercise like walking to balance their mental energy. Alot of Mrigashira types
are prone to physical lethargy, which besides making them functionally useless, makes them susceptible
to physical ailments.

[page 77]
73
Mrigashira natives are usually thinly built with youthful delicate features; a smiley, jovial and
lighthearted disposition; and warm, gentle manners. They are the restless type and may appear as
flaky or fidgety to others. They usually convey a sense of fragility through their appearance and
mannerisms. Their mind is always roaming about, which in many cases takes the form of daydreaming.
They are charming, spontaneous, enthusiastic types who enjoy meeting and relating with people.
They are good.conversationalists, advisors and enjoy all vocal activities like talking and singing.
They have a poetic soul and enjoy beauty in both spoken and written forms of communication. They
are natural satirists and have a strong sense of humour which comes about due to their varied
experiences. Despite their conversational skill and sociability, they are naturally shy. Their shyness
has to do with their inherent timidity. They don't like confrontations and therefore are very cautious
regarding whom they mingle with.
They love life and know how to suck delight out of it, just like gods take delight out of drinking
soma (celestial nectar). A honey bee buzzing about sucking juice from different flowers, sums up
Mrigashira! functioning in this regard. Mrigashira natives are often quite whimsical in their approach,
just like a honey bee would choose not to suck juice from a particular flower for no apparent rhyme
or reason. Mrigashira craves excitement in all its mild and benevolent forms and is not prone to go
to self-destructive eltremes like cruel nakshatras.
Mrigashira natives often display a highly suspicious nature. This comes about due to their high
alertness levels and their ability to sense danger, just like deer or stags do in their forest environment.
This suspicious nature is especially troublesome in regards to marital felicity. Like all the nakshatras
ruled by Mars, Mrigashira promotes domestic bickerings due to suspicion and an inability to be
attentive to their paftner's needs. Their partners usually get more attached to them than they do.
Mrigashira is a part bohemian nakshatra and doesn't like restricting its affections to one person.
Those having a strong influence of this nakshatra in their chafts, usually experience maritaldisharmony
in one form or the other. However if both partners give each other enough space, Mrigashira through
its lovingness and delightfulness, promotes profound marital stability like that of Paruati and Shiva.

[page 78]
74
Since Mrigashira signals the arrival of Mercurial energy through beginning the sign Gemini, it is
the place where discrimination is born. It is also the first nakshatra where conclusions are drawn and
fixed opinions are formed as a result of experiences. Mrigashira, despite its lightness, is a very fixed
nakshatra when it comes to attitudes and opinions. It will never back down in any civilized argument.
In its highest functioning, Mrigashira makes one very conscious of their life path and purpose.
The whole poiht of this nakshatra is to make one go through a variety of experiences, for finding
one's true path in life. For example, if one was born to be a singer, one may dabble around with a lot
of other things like painting, writing, or just plain nine to five jobs before their true niche is discovered.
In the case of highly evolved souls, the varied experiences generated through the energy of this
nakshatra, all fit a definite and singular purpose, while in the case of younger less evolved souls,
these experiences are an endless maze without a final destination.
In the universal scheme of things, Mrigashira relates to "prinana shakti" or the power to give
fulfillment. Its symbolism has extension above and weaving Oetow. inis is obviously a representation
of fabric undergoing the weaving process. If we take this fabric to be the fabric of life, then Mrigashira
is the structure and principles which create beauty in the chaotic process which is life.
Modp of fffictioning
It is a Passive nakhatra. Its passivity relates to a strong awareness of others. Mrigashira
usually doesn't have the spotlight on itself and has its attention concentrated on the outside. In a
way it is a passive nakshatra in relation to the dynamics of the self.
Caste :
It belongs to the Farmer caste. In ancient times Mrigashira was often related to aftisans,
agricultural workers and community in general.

[page 79]
75
Qender
It is a Neutral nakshatra. Mrigashira is basically a hermaphrodite energy and has the ability to
function both as a male or female. This dual functioning is clear from its ruling deities Moon and
Parvati. Moon is seen as a male deity by the Vedic seers while Paruati is the female companion of
Shiua.
tsodyparts U Hurwr (Ayuruedic Corutitution) :
Eyes and Eyebrows are the body parts related to this nakshatra.
It is a primarily "Pitta" (fiery) nakshatra. This stems from the fact that it is the bifthplace of
Martian energy. Mars as we know is a primarily Pitta planet. One must however keep in mind that
Mrigashira's fiery quality is not fierce or hurtful. It can be related to the fire which cook our food, or
the digestive fire which digests the food in our stomach, but not thetremation pyre fire which burns
our bodies.
Directinn
Its range is the arc between south west and north west.
galas (Qnrters): '
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 23o 20' - 260 40'Taurus, falls in Leo navamsa and is
ruled by Sun. This pada relates to the fixed and unyielding side of Mrigashira, which however has the
ability to express its experiences through creative and aftistic activities.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 26o 40' - 30o 00' Taurus, falls in Virgo Navamsa
ruled by Mercury. This pada represents the discriminatory calculative, satirical and humorous side of
Mrigashira. The conversational acumen and the strong mental ability of Mrigashira is more evident

[page 80]
76
here. The fusing of the planetary energies of Mercury and Venus takes place here in such a way that
the more grounded practical side of Mrigashira is expressed.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 00o 00' - 3" 20' Gemini, falls in Libra Navamsa ruled
by Venus. This is the first pada of Mrigashira which falls in the sign Gemini. The emphasis here is on
sociability and a penchant for exploring the mental side of all types of relationships. Just like the
previous pada,'a fusing of Mercurial and Venusian energies takes place here, but on a whole, this
pada is more airy in comparison to the previous pada; and thus cannot give strong material results.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 30 20' - 6o 40' Gemini, falls in Scorpio Navamsa
ruled by Mars. This pada relates to the intellectual, argumentative, suspicious, flaky and whimsical
part of this nakshatra. This pada is not as superficial as the previous Libra pada, but tends to over-
intellectualize matters, rather than getting to the root of anything. Most of the negative qualities of
Mrigashira find expression through this pada. It can function wisely only in evolved souls and thereto
through proper guidance.
lProfessions :
Artists of all types; Singers & Musicians; Painters; Poets; Linguists; Romantic Novelists; Writers;
Thinkers and Seekers; Gemstone dealers; Dealers in Earth related products; Those involved in the
Textile & Garment Industry; Fashion Designers & Trendsetters; Veterinarians;All professions dealing
with animals as pets; Salespersons of all kinds; Adveftising agencies; Administrators; Landscapers;
Farmers & Gardeners; Forestry workers; Real Estate developers; Map makers & Navigators; Travellers
& Explorers; Psychics and Astrologers; Teachers especially those dealing with beginners; Artisans &
Clerks; Commentators.
Forests, Fields & Meadows; Deer Parks; Villages and Small Towns; Bedrooms; Playgrounds;
Nurseries; Nursery Schools; Recreation rooms; Entertainment places of all kinds; Streets, Footpaths

[page 81]
77
& Roads; Lawns & Gardens; Forest trails; Art & Music studios; Small shops; Markets and other sales
places; Astrological & Psychic institutions; All places connected with the above professions.
Quna ('Essence) and tattwa (Efcment) :
It is supposed to be a Tamasic (inert) nakshatra. This however shouldn't be taken in any
negative sense, as it is basically a divine nakshatra (see Gana). It is associated with tamas because
of its association with the tamasic planet Mar3. The basic significations of Mars were seen as tamasic
by the ancient Vedic seers; The "I can't get no satisfaction" aspect of Mrigashira is what makes it
tamasic. However this nakshatra will behave in a predominantly tamasic way only if predominantly
tamasic planets like Rahu, Mars and Saturn inhabit it.
It is the last among the nakshatras whose dominant element is Earth. This basically relates to
this nakshatra's capacity for producing quick results on the material plane.
Qorra $ype) :
It is seen by the ancient seers as a Divine/Dera nakshatra. It relates more to the beings on the
astral plane then us humans. This classification reflects upon the refinement oriented focus of
Mrigashira.
Orient*tion (t Disposition :
It is a Level nakshatra. This reiterates the fact that Mrigashira is not an extreme energy and
stays within limits. It is always trying to achieve a balance between expansion and contraction.
Itis a Mridu(soft, mild and tender) nakshatra. This is pretty evident from the fact that Mrigashira
is most suitable for seeking and enjoying pleasure on all planes of existence. Its pursttit of knowledge
also takes place in an easygoing, enjoyable fashion.

[page 82]
78
Lunar fufontfi. d Daq :
It refates to the first half of the lunar month of Margashircha. This month usually corresponds
to the month of December in the solar calendar. This month is also known as Arghayana because of
Mrigashira's afternative name Arghayani.It refers to an era when this month denoted the start of the
year. In the present age the lunar month of Chaita represents the start of the year.
Mrigashira is also related to the Panchami ( 5th tithi or day) of the waxing and waning phases of
the Mmn's monthly cyde.
Auspi^ciotu Actirtitit's :
Generally favourable for all lightheafted activities; Especially good for travel, exploring nature,
sightseeing; Sexual activity; All types of artistic work; Healing and rejuvenation practices; Commencing
educational ventures; Excellent for socializing; Changing residence; Good for all activities requiring
communication; Good for setting up altars, religious items and performing spiritual initiations; Good
for adveftising and sales activitiy; Taking a new name.
Inauspici"ous Actiztitits :
Unfavourable for marriage ceremonies (Vedic texts reveal that Shiva married Parvati when
Moon was transitting through this nakhatra, and consequently their marriage went through many
upheavals); Bad for hard and harsh actions of any kind; Not favourable for confrgntaUons or making
longterm impoftant decisions of a serious nature.
Qfanetary fu.br :
The main planetary influences affecting this nakshatra are Mars, Venus and Mercury. Mars is
the main ruling planet of Mrigashira. In fact as we mentioned earliq martian energy comes into
being through Mrigashira. Mars is the source, which provides energy for Mrigashira's "search". Mars

[page 83]
79
here acts as an impulse planet, which encapsulates all the meanings associated with the word
"desire".
We have already seen in the discussions on previous nakshatras, how the original creative fires
(represented by the sign Aries), solidifu into the eafth element (represented by the sign Taurus). In
Mrigashira, these creative fires, which are now encased in an eafthy, material sheath, try and mobilize
matter' One way to understand this is to take a look at how modern day automobiles function. The
average car is a heavy, metallic object, which is incapable of moving on its own, and ib movement
is only possible due to the fire/spark based internal combustion engines. In the same way, the
martian energy here, becomes the force that drives matter, thus instilling a sort of life into it.
Mrigashira forms a bridge between Taurus and Gemini, and consequently relates to the fusing
of Mercurial and Venusian energies. It is interesting to note that besides Chitn (146 nakshatra) and
Dhanishtha (23rd nakshatra), Mrigashira is the only nakshatra, which lies equally divided among two
signs' Mrigashira has thus a strong sense of duality about it as it tries to resolve the conflict between
eafth and air, two naturally incompatible elements. Venus relates to the more earthy, Taurus part of
this nakshatra, while Mercury relates to the airy Gemini part of this nakhatra. All the desirable
qualities of Mrigashira like its aftistic abilities and zest for life, abiility to find the true life path or
purpose, all come about only when the energies of Mercury and Venus are properly merged.
Planetary conjunctions like Mars/Mercury Mercury/Venus, Mars/Venus and Mars/Mercury/Venus
carry energies similar to Mrigashira. The presence of Mars or Saturn in this nakshatra is usually not
auspicious for marital felicity. Both of them however can give good material results in the Taurus part
of Mrigashira. In fact barring Jupiter, all other planets can usually give good material results in the
Taurus part.
'Iloraek an[ AIpfiabe* :
The first pada or quafter ofthis asterism 23o 20' - 26o 40'Taurus corresponds to uVe" as in Vela.

[page 84]
80
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 260 40' - 30" 00'Taurus corresponds to "Vo" as in
Vocal.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism O0o 00' - 3" 20' Gemini corresponds to "Ka" as in
Katherine.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 3o 20' - 6o 40' Gemini corresponds to "Kee" as in
Keanu.
In the Sanskrit alphabet Mrigashira coiresponds to "Em" and consequently its mantra is "Om
Em".
Seryat'lype onl Cotnpatifii[ity :
Its sexual animal is a Serpent. Mrigashira is one of the experts in lovemaking. In all ancient
cultures snakes or snakelike beings have been regarded as symbols of sexual potency and are seen
as adepts at the art of sexual union. It is most compatible with the other serpent nakshatra Rohini.
For sexual & marriage compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the tables on pages
457 & 458 .
Tsoteric :
The most ancient tale relating to the formation of this nakshatra goes thus:-
,,Brahma,the creator among the trinity, became obsessed with his own daughter Rohini(Brahma
as we know is in a very funny position as every woman is his daughter). He was chasing Rohini in the
form of a deer. 1hiva, thedestroyer among the trinity, cut the deer's head off with an arrow and thus
the deer head's stars of Mrigashira came into being. "
If one looks at the relative placements of Rohini, Mrigashira and Ardra (the nakshatra which is
supposed to be the residence of Shiva), the story immediately makes sense. The deer head of
Mrigashira faces Rohini in the night sky.

[page 85]
81
The constellation of Orionas a whole has always been regarded as an Archer. There are hundreds
of tales of Parvati watching on as Shiva used his archery skills to kill demons or demonic cities, or the
head of Brahma as we saw in the above mentioned story.
The fact that Mrigashira is supposed to be Parvati's abode, makes sense as it gives Parvati the
right vantage point to obserue Shiva's adventures in his Rudraform. Also the fact that Mrigashira can
be seen either as a deer's head or an arched bow, reveals the dual functioning of this nakshatra as
both the hunter and the hunted.
In all ancient cultures, Orion was supposed to be the abode of Pnjipati. Prajipatis are the
progenitors of all kinds of species inhabiting the universe. In this sense Brahma is the original
Prajipati, This fact in the above mentioned story establishes a strong connection between Brahma
and that portion of the celestial sky. Brahma however seems to have shifted his abode to the
neighbouring Rohini. Please refer to the Rulirp Deity section of Rohini.
Mrigashira relates to the point where curiosity is born in thl process of creation. From a
material point of view, we can see that all motion in the physical universe, even on an atomic level
is dependant upon a physical quantity known as heat. Since Mrigashira is the initiator of Martian
energy, it relates to the point in time where the temperature of the universe reaches the appropriate
value for life to flourish. Heat and motion are the primary aspects of the planet Mars and they have
their roots in this nakshatra.
Qotra (Cettstiat Lineage) :
This nakshatra is related to the Sage Pulasthya, one of the seven celestial sages looking after
the affairs of our galaxy. The name of this sage translates into "having smooth hair". One can
immediately see that Pulasthya has a strong connection with the soft, refined aspect of Mrigashira.
funudiat :
For those suffering from bad effects resulting from afflictions to this nakshatra, the best remedial
measure is worship of ParvaU. Worship of the Moon is also favourable in increasing the favourable

[page 86]
82
e,ffecb of this nakshatra.
Repetition of the root mantra of this nakshaba - "Om Em" 108 times when Moon transits this
nakshatra and in the lunar month of Margashirsha is sure to reduce suffering and bring enlightenment
into a person's life.
Persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this nakshatra can also increase the
good effects through the above mentioned ways. It is helpful for them to wear colours like red and
white, green and light bright sparkly shades. They should use its directions, lunar month and the
days when Moon transits Mrigashira to undeftake all important actions.
lEapmp{e :
The ftmous classical comp*r Gorge Frderick Handelhas his Moon in Mrigashira. He was in
fact the only composer of his time who fashioned his work specifically around singers. His music has
a Mrigashira quality about it. The author of this book has his atmakaraka Mercury placed in the
seond pada of Mrigashiral
Misceffanuus :
According to Vanhamihir4Moon in Mrigashira is "fickle, clever, timid, shrewd, energetic, wealthy
and delighting in enjoyment." Most of these qualities seem to fit the illustrator of this work who has
her atmakaraka Moon placed in the first pada of this nakshatra!
Paruati, the presirJing deity of this nakshatra and consort of Shiva, is supposed to have her
Moon placed in the Taurus paft of this nakshatra. Alot of her qualities, as revealed by the various
puranic stories involving her, fit Varahamihira's description. Since she is an archetypal goddess, she
@n assume new forms like Durga and Kali, which embody completely different.characteristics.
,***

[page 87]
6.
Artro
(6040' Gemini - 20000'Gemini)
In ttu Sky ,
Ardra, the seed of Rahu's energy, consisb of the bright star in the constellation of Oion, knorrrn
in modern astronomy as Betelguese (Alpha-Orionis). With a visual magnitude of 0.57, this red giant
is one of the brightest stars in the night sky. Betelguese is the bright star at the top left hand corner
of Orion. It is revered in most ancient cultures as a very important star as it is supposed to have a
strong influence on our planet. The ancient vedic seers saw this bright red star as being the abode
of Rudra, the fierce red form of Shiva.
Mnu:
Ardra can have many varied English translations like - "green", "fresh", "the moist one". Its not
hard to notice that all these translations are connected and carry a feeling of renewal. For example,
the word "moist" may refer to the moisture in the air which forms the clouds, which in fum cause
rain' The rain in turn brings life to the earthly vegetation and makes them "fresh" and "green".
Tears is one image which comes across instantly to one's mind when moisture is related with
human feelings. A "teardrop" in fact is one of the most well-known symbols of this asterism. Sweat
is another physical phenomenon which can be linked with moisture and the ancient texts associate
this asterism with the oppressive heat of the Sun, which as vrre know is responsible br the sweating
process.

[page 88]
6. \rdr^ 6'10'(;emini -zo"oo' Qemini

[page 89]
86
Sym6o[ :
Its main symbol is a Diamond, even though many scholars see a Teardrop as its primary symbol.
As we have already seen, the name of this nakshatra relates to moisture and wetness. The
symbolism of the tear drop associates it with all kinds of sorrow. The tear drop symbolism also
relates to water in all its droplet forms, like the early morning dew drops on the leaves or the
thousands of drops left around after the rain has come and gone. These dew drops, as we can see,
symbolise freshness and renewal. Even tear drops are paft of a cleansing process and relate more to
the dispersal of sorrow rather than the actual production of it. This cathartic process is similar to that
of a baby, which can cry one minute and be smiling the next as if nothing happened'
This is a futuristic nakshatra, which tends to release one from the decaying past through a
series of stormy events. It must be remembered though that all these storms are usually of a very
short duration and don't last very long. If one does not try to cling to the past one can sail through
this phase with ease and be rewarded with a renewal akin to the freshness of the leaves after the
rain. For example, one feels disappointed when one loses a job, but this might provide a new
oppoftunity for one to pursue one's favoured vocation and find success there in. This is the reason
why'a diamond' is the main symbol of this nakshatra.
R diurond, as we know, is formed after been acted upon by extreme heat and pressure for
millions of years. In the same way, this asterism can produce a glowing personality after one has
successfully gone through the storms that wash away the old. The diamond symbolism also relates
to the hard work required to extract the shining and brilliant jewel of knowledge from the stormy
vicissitudes of this nakshatra.
A diamond is mainly a mental and intellectual symbol, with its reflective multi-dimensional
layers, signiffing the multifarious aspects of Manomayakosha (mentaUintellectual plane). Just as
the brilliance of a diamond depends on the amount of light falling on it, the brilliance of the mind and
intellect depends upon the amount of light the soul has. Ardra's alternative symbol, "a man's head",
also conveys a similar idea of mind and mentality'
.L-.

[page 90]
87
The diamond is also the hardest known substance on the material plane and this hardness in
turn relates to the unyielding and determined aspect of this nakhatra. This nakshatra has a sharp,
piercing quality to it and can cut through anything with ease in much the same way as a diamond
can. Getting to the root of the matter is very important to this nakshatra. Ardra is therefore directly
connected to one's depth of perception.
Deity :
Its presiding deity is Rudra, which translates into'the terrible','the ruddy red','the transformer'
or the 'the howler'. The reference to red colour gains significance from the fact that astronomers
actually refer to Beteleguese (the primary star of this nakshatra) as "the Red Giant". Rudra represents
the destructive and transformative aspect of Shiva (the destroyer among the Vedic trinity).
Rudra is also seen as the Storm God by some Vedic texts, which again points towards a sense
of commotion and upheaval. Rudra relates to chaos, disorder, confusion, anarchy and havoc. However
most wise men will agree, that in fact, it is these terrible things which more often than not turn
people around. Very few embrace change unless put against the wall!
The primary essence of Ardra is'change' and Rudra knows exactly what is required to bring it
about. The period before the storm, where the dark clouds gather accompanied by li$htning and
thunder, is the atmosphere Rudra revels in and relates to (refer to the image). Ardra can be seen as
an expeft at producing these kinds of situations, bringing in such experiences into a person's life.
Storm is an impoftant phenomenon through which nature finds its release. Ardra can be seen
as marking the period just before, during and after a rainstorm. Rudra is intimately connected with
the constellation of Orion, lThe Hunter". Orion is supposed to be the most important constellation in
terms of its effect on earth and humanity. It is revered in all the Vedic texts as the gateway from
where the souls descend to begin their earthly life and is thus called the "Giver of Life". It aids in the
evoluUonary process of humanity through triggering impoftant changes. Some of these changes

[page 91]
88
may appear destructive on an individual or collective level like a violent storm, but they are always
auspicious in the sense that they always trigger new growth.
Rudra has many legends attached to him in the ancient Vedic texts. We will deal with the most
famous amongst these and other aspects of Orion's importance in the Esoteric Section,
A@ure d functioni:ng :
The nature of Ardra is like the nature of a child. Natives under its influence have an ability to flit
from intense joy to intense sorrow, to somewhere in between within a matter of minutes. Ardra is
always involved in a churning process. This makes the natives under its strong influence to be
undergoing constant transformation. In some cases, this process produces good things like gems of
knowledge and in some cases it produces negative things like poisonous thoughts and confusion.
Ardra is the first nakshatra where an attempt is made on a mental/ intellectual plane to understand
the functionin gs of maya.This is the place where intellect is born. In the previous nakshatra, Mrigashira,
mind develops its capacity to roam and wander. In Ardra an intellect is developed to synthesize the
experience gained through these wanderings. Ardra is still pretty much as curious as Mrigashira, the
only difference being that Ardra likes to know the cause behind the effect, while Mrigashira is mostly
content with observing and enjoying the effect'
It can be said that Mrigashira "enjoys" and Ardra "dissects". This is probably the reason why all
natives born under its influence have research orientated and probing intellects. When an Ardra
native enters a room one cirn immediately recognise their probing quality. Even seven year old
children like to observe and understand people around them. This obseruing is usually without any
regards for couftesy and they can be quite upfront about voicing their findings
In the universal scheme of things, Ardra relates to 'yabta shaki" - the power to make efforts.
Its main theme is searching and reaching the desired goal. Ardra thus finishes off the searching that
began in Mrigshira. Achievement is the result of Ardra's energy'

[page 92]
89
It is easy to see that that the english words like - "arduous" and "ardent" have been derived
from "Ardra" and thus relate to ib functionings. In fact, English as a language has a lot to do with
the energies of Ardra.
Ardra is the nakshatra where mental sensitivity and impressionability develops as the stormy
vicissitudes of this nakshatra make the mind active and reactive. This sensitivity makes Ardra natives
susceptible to dll kinds of hurts and in some cases gives a strong desire to help those who are
suffering or hurt. The underlying emotional thirst of Ardra is based upon empathy. Even Rudra, its
ruling deity, came into being to protect Rohinifrom Brahma (please refer to the story in the Deity
section of Rohini pge).
Even a thunderstorm is nothing but nature's way of relieving Eafth's vegetation of its misery.
Ardra is the first nakshatra where emotions are encountered by the mind. There is a constant need
for balancing the mental and emotional impulses in this nakshatra.
Natives born with Ardra rising on the Ascendant usually have large faces, curly hair and sullen
expression. The eyes have a pafticular piercing quality about them and the expression, ,'going rcd
with anger", literally applies to Ardra natives. The mad, absentminded professor archetype is an
Ardra character. They have good memory and are quick to respond to facts and figures. It must be
noted thbt Ardra natives don't usually veriff the facG before they speak. Although they may appear
calm outside there is usually some raging storm going on in their heads. Their lives are full of
extreme changes and complete turn-arounds,
Ardra natives are intense and unrelenting observers of both themselves and others. This quality,
coupled with the fact that they usually put their thoughts into speech, makes them appear impolite
and critical. In some cases their sarcasm can cause much pain or agony to others. In lesser evolved
souls, Ardra displays its childlike tendency to serue selfish ends through lying, unscrupulousness etc.
They are, however, courageous like Rudra and don't mind any type of confrontation.
Ardra people are like storms running around and the reactions they get from other people is as
varied. They are good at scaring people, especially the softer types. Their physical constitution is

[page 93]
90
usually quite strong, which makes them good at physically oriented jobs. On the material prosperity
scale, they tend to fluctuate between extremes. They are, however, usually not good with finances,
as they are likely to spend all of their earnings. Just like a seven year old child, Ardra is rnt very
concerned about money.
Because of the illusionary energies of Rahu, Ardra can create a whole lot of confusion and make
Ardra natives scatter away their intellectual and mental energies in meaningless pursuits. It can also
make them stubborn, arrogant and reckless. In the present day and age, where science and technology
have a strong hold over the mass consciousness, Ardra natives usually waste their potential on these
material science5, which in most cases don't bring about any evolution on the soul level. It is seen
that a lot of physicists make the shift from physics to metaphysics late in their lives, after exhausting
all its possibilities. This shows how people can waste their whole lives before coming to any meaningful
conclusion. All Ardra natives get a chance to transform their lives for the better, but in today's hyper
materialistic age, where all types of illusions abound, it is no easy task.
In the case of highly evolved souls, Ardra functions in a different way. In such cases, the
universal mind tests them through stormy conditions and situations, in order to test their resolve
and understanding. History is the proof that all great personalities have undergone many storms in
their lives. Besides testing our faith, these storms clear away the dust of negative karmas from
previous lives. Ardra is the storm which wakes us from our stagnating slumber and makes us howl
and cry out the most impoftant question "Why!"
Modc of funrtioning :
Ardra is considered to be a Balanced nakshatra. Its balanced nature stems from its mental and
intellectual acumen. Those who thin( analyze and contemplate, don't usually go to extremes. All of
Ardra's diffi.rsion, chaos and storminess is nothing but nature's way of restoring balance. If we are
facing some tormenting situation in the present life, its only purpose is to dissolve and balance out
our karmas from previous lives. The thunderstorm is also a typical manifestation of nature's way of
restoring balance.

[page 94]
91
Caste
It belongs to the Butcher caste. It is Ardra's job to remove or put an end to whatever has
outlived its usefulness. Ardra's presiding deity Rudra, is well known for getting the universe rid of
unwanted demonic forces. As we will see in the Esoteric section, Rudra didn't think twice about a
very serious issue like cutting off one of Brahma's heads.
$endcr :
Ardra is a Female nakshatra. Even though its presiding deity, Rudra is male, all of this nakshatra's
background and Rudra's functioning, relate to the chaotic, wrathful state of nature. The terms
associated with Ardra like'tenderness', 'moistness'and freshness'can only be regarded as being
feminine. The renewal which the earth's vegetation experiences after rainfall is also one of nature's
feminine phenomenas.
tsodyparts (t l{umor (Ayuruedir Corutitution) :
The body organs it relates to, the Eyes and the Back and Front of the Head, highlight its
perceptive and analyzing quality. As neurologists are now discovering, most of the brain's controlling
mechanisms are located in the front and back of the head.
It belongs to the Vata (airy) humor. This is clear from the fact that all of this nakshatra lies
within the vata sign of &mini. Its planetary ruler Rahu is also a primarily vata planet. There can be
no storm without air!
Direction :
It is related primarily to southwest, west and north.

[page 95]
92
ea{as (@nrters)
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 6" 40' - 10" 00' Gemini, hlls in Sagittarius Navamsa
and is ruled by Jupiter. This pada relates to the exploratory and curious side of Ardra. Planets placed
here have a happy go lucky disposition, but are prone to material excesses. This is the beginning of
the storm and thus conditions here are not very unfavourable
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 10o 00' - 13" 20' Gemini, falls in Capricorn Navamsa
ruled by Saturn. This pada gives a strong interest in all types of materialistic pursuits and frustration
therein. Most of the negative qualities of this nakshatra are manifested through this pada. The storm
has gained momentum here and thus the planets placed here give constant troubles and misfortunes.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 13o 20' - 15o 40' Gemini, falls in Aquarius Navamsa
ruled by Saturn. This pada relates to the electrical, scientific and research oriented part of Ardra's
functioning. The storm here is at its peak lightning stage and thus the planets posited here can give
short stdden bursts of inspiraUon. Mental activity is at its peak in this pada.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 160 40' - 20o 00' Gemini, falls in Pisces Navamsa
ruled by Jupiter. This is the Pushkara Navamsa pada of Ardra. It relates to the sensitive and
compassionate aspect of Ardra. It has a sffiong desire to help those less fortunate than itself in the
process of evolution. The storm is ending here and so the conditions are miH and peaceful in
comparison to the two previous padas. Planets posited usually give benefic expansive results.
lProfusiors :
Electrical Engineers and Electricians; Electronic & Computer Industry; Computer Software
Developers; Sound Engineers & Technicians; Musicians, especially those involved in Electronic Music;
English Language Experts; Weapon Expefts; Photographers; SpecialEffects people in the Film Industry;
Computer Game Designers & Sci Fi Buffu; 3D & Virtual Reality Experts; Manual Labourers of all
types; Physicists, Mathematicians & Researchers; Scientisbs; Profound Thinkers & Philosophers; Writers
& Novelists, especially of the science fiction genre; Surgeons; Physicians who administer poisons in

[page 96]
93
small amounts as remedies like Homeopaths; Allopathic doctors; Those involved in mental sports
like Chess, Scrabble, Bridge etc.; Morticians; Chemical & Fertilizer industry; Pharmaceutical Industry;
Professions involving handling poisons of any type; Those working in Nuclear Power Plants; Eye &
brain Specialists & Surgeons; Psychoanalysts & Psychotherapists; Those specializing in healing or
curing Brain & Head disorders; Investigators, Detectives & Mystery Solvers; Analysts of all types;
Lighting expefts; Xray Specialists & Radar Personnel; Food Processing Places which produce canned,
frozen & junkfood; Thieves; Legal & Illegal Drug Dealers; Sales people adept at lying and double
talk; Biotechnologists; chemotherapists; Politicians & Manipulators; snipers & Hitmen.
9facu :
Geographical places where natural phenomena like thunderstorms, hurricanes and tomadoes
are common; Research laboratories of all types; High tech studios and shops; Hospitals;
Communication centres like radar facilities, radio stations, television studios, telegraph offices; Nuclear
power plants; All factories dealing with poisonous chemical processes; Escalators; Military bases
where weapons are stored & maintained; All places connected with the above mentioned professions.
In today's day and age every home has its share of Ardra because of electrical wirings and
appliance.
, Quna ('Essence) an"d,Tattzaa (Etenrcnt)
It is a Tamasb nakshatra. Its tamasic quality arises due to its association with the tamasic
graha, Rahu. Ib tamasic quality manifests itself as chaos, diffi.rsion, disturbance and fuzziness.
It belongs to the Water element. Its wateriness is evident from its symbolism and imagery. This
shows that there are strong underlying emoUons involved within the intellectualism of Ardra.

[page 97]
94
Qana $ype) :
Itisa Manusha or human nakshatra. Its association with Mercury the planet which forms a
bridge between the lower and higher worlds, relates it to the plane of humanity which lies right in
the middle of the fourteen planes (realms) of existence. This asterism carries the illusory aspect of
its ruler Rahu, which is very involved with humanity and its struggle on the material plane on the
planet eafth. '
Orientatint d Disposition :
Ardra is an Upward nakshatra. Just like Rudra aims his arrow towards the sky (refer to image)'
Ardra sets its goals high. It seeks intellectual challenges and higher knowledge in all its forms.
Whenever we encounter troublesome situations in our life, we are often forced to question the why
behind it all. This is usually the time when many among us turn our gaze upwards towards the sky,
where all the answers lie.
Itisa Tikshna or sharp and forceful nakshatra. This is evident from its ruling deity, the Storm
God. It functions in a sudden sharp manner akin to a snake bite. Rahu as we know is a harsh planet.
Biting sarcasm and distressful events are associated with this asterism. Even when giving good
results it gives them in a sudden sharp manner'
Lunar Montfi d Daq
It refates to the second half (the middle 9 days) of the lunar month of Margashircha' This
period usually corresponds to the month of December in the solar calendar.
-' 
Ardra is afso related to the Ekadashi ( 1ldl Uthi or day) of the waxing and waning phases of the
Moon's monthly cycle.

[page 98]
95
Auspicbus Actiaitizs :
Only auspicious for activities related to its profession and places; Favourable for destructive
activities like demolishing old buildings; Discarding old and wornout habits and objects; Good for
confronting underlying issues and difficult problems which have been lurking around; Good for
research and creative activities within its domain; Good for propitiating fierce deities like Rudra and
lGli.
Innuspicious Actiaitits :
Unfavourable for any type of beginning; Generally inauspicious for all auspicious activities like
marriage, travel, giving and receiving honours, religious ceremonies and the like.
etarutary fotfer :
Even though Rahu is the main planetary ruler of Ardra, it can be seen as a combination of the
energies of Mercury and Rahu. Mercury and Rahu are both intellectual planets dealing with the
duality of life and nature. Rahu's Mercurial side is relayed through this nakshatra. This heightens the
intellectual and thinking capacity of Ardra natives, and involvement in activities which emphasize
communication, thinking or use of the hands. It ensures abundant mental and neruous energy and
mercurial qualities like wit versatility, quickness of thought and communication ability. Just like a
diamond, Ardra's intellectualism is usually piercing and multifaceted.
In its negative aspect the Rahu-Mercury influence of this nakshatra will make one misuse their
skills for selfish ends or harming others. In some cases the intellect is distorted to an extent that the
native doesn't think twice about indulging in criminal actions. However one must be careful regarding
what one does under the influence of Ardra, because the consequences usually have to be faced
within this lifetime. This is also a good thing in the sense that we don't have to carry our baggage
into future lives and possibility of redemption within the present life itself cannot be ruled out. Rahu
and Mercury's energy can also get one caught up in the present day information boom, which has

[page 99]
96
very little to do with real knowledge. In its higher aspect, it can give true knowledge and the ability
to look through illusions. It can also connect one's intellect to the unseen realms and as a result give
intuitive or psychic perception.
Ardra is the birthplace of Rahu's mysterious energy. Here nature deliberately introduces chaos
and difftrsion, in order to facilitate the process of creation and manifestation. We can see that the
creative process has been quite ordered in the previous nakshatras. Ardra is thus related to that
random x-factor in the universe which can never be grasped. In the language of physics, this is best
exemplified by the "unceftainty principle" and "quantum theory", both of which broadly state that
nothing is certain and everything is just a probability. In other words, Maya is unfathomable. It
however reveals itself through true enlightenment - a process which involves all the 27 nakshatras.
iloutek and Alpfinbe* :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 6o 40' -10o 00' Gemini corresponds to "Ku" as in
Kubrick.
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 10o 00' - 13" 20' Gemini @rresponds to "Khal' as in
Khalsa.
The third pada or quafter of this asterism 13o 20' - 16o 40' Gemini corresponds to "Nga" as in
Nancy.
The fourth pada or quafter of this asterism 160 40' - 20" 00' Gemini corresponds to "Chha" as
in Chhatri (hindu for umbrella).
In the Sanskrit alphabet Ardra corresponds to "Aee" and consequently its mantra is "Om Aeem".

[page 100]
97
Serc^taf type and Compatihi[itg :
Its sexual animal is a Dog. As is clear from the image, the dog is an aggressive howling hound
and not a friendly Scottish terrier! Dogs are supposed to be sexually active animals and thus Ardra
can be excessively indulgent in regards to sexual matters. It is most compatible with Mula, the other
dog asterism
For sexual and marital compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the tables on pages
457 & 458
'Esoteric :
Recent findings have shown that the constellation presently known as Orion, or the hunter, was
of special interest to the ancient Egyptians. It has been assigned special status in Vedic mythology as
well. This constellation houses two asterisms, Mrigashira and Ardra. Mrigashira is represented by the
ftont three stars which form the bow of the hunter. Ardra, as we have discussed earlier, is represented
by the bright star of Betelguese, which is situated at the top left part of Orion. We also know that
Ardra is ruled by Rahu, which connects Rahu with Orion.
Accogding to some Vedic scholars, Betelguese is supposed to be the abode of Shiva. Orion was
supposed to come into being when Shiva assumed the form of a hunter and took out one of Brahmat
heads with his arrow. This makes sense when one sees that Brahma is the ruling deity of the
neighbouring constellation Rohini. We have already seen that Vedic seers think of Mrigashira, the
neighbouring nakshatra, as Paruati's(consort of Shiva) abode. Though not well recognized by scholars,
the fact is that Mrigashira and Ardra fonn a sort of a pair like Purua Phalguni (11h nakshatra) and
Uttara Phalguni (12s nakshatra).
As we have already discussed, Rudra, the fierce form of Shiva, is the presiding deity of Ardn.
This establishes a relation between Rahu and Shiva, the destroyer among the Trinity. Some Vedic
texts have gone to the extent of saying that Rahu resides in the heart of Neelkantha, another name
for Shiva. We can see that Rahu and Shiva are relatives, as Shiva is the husband of the sister of the

[page 101]
98
mother of Rahu. His closeness with Shiva is one of the reasons why Rahu co-rules Aquarius, the sign
most related to Shiva. They even share the same electric blue complexion, a colour associated with
Aquarius.
The significance of Orion lies in the fact that it stands right in the middle of the galactic gateway
between Taurus and Gemini. It is said that all the souls incarnating on planet Earth come through
this galactic A'ateway. We can understand this astronomically in the sense that the gateway points
away from the centre of our galaxy and can thus be seen as a doorway into our galaxy.
This is why Vedic texts relate Orion with the Pnjapati, the progenitor of human race. Even
ancient Egyptians saw Orion as Osiris, the father of all humanity. Orion is also situated very close in
the night sky to Sirius, the star around which our Sun is supposed to revolve, but a detailed discussion
on the importance of Sirius lies beyond the scope of this book.
In the universal scheme of things, Ardra relates to "yatna shaKi" - the power to make effort.
The effort is exemplified by the shooting of the arrow. Its symbolism has hunting above, and the
goal below.
Qotra (Cetzstiat Lineage) :
This nakshatra is related to the Sage Pulahu, one of the seven celestial sages lmking after the
affairs of our galaxy. The name of this sage translates into "connector of space". Ardra as we have
discussed before, gives a fascination for space and all spacey things like sci-fi adventures. It makes
sense therefore that this spacey nakshatra would relate to this sage, who is known to connect space.
fumedia[ :
For those suffering from bad effects resulting from afflictions to this nakshatra, the best remedial
measure is worship of Shiva, in his terrible Rudra form.

[page 102]
99
Repetition of the root mantra of this nakshatra - "Om Aeem" 108 times when Moon transits this
nakshatra and in its corresponding lunar month is sure to reduce suffering and bring enlightenment
into a person's life.
Persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this nakshatra can also increase the
good effects through the above mentioned ways. It is helpful for them to wear colours like red,
green, shiny metallic colours emulating lightning, all storm colours like silvers, dark greys and black.
They should use its directions, lunar month and the days when Moon transits Ardra to undertake all
important actions.
E4arupf"e :
Albert Einstein, the famous physicist, was born with Ardra rising. His appearance, life and works
reveal a lot regarding Ardra's functioning.
Misceffaneous :
According to Varahamihira, Moon's placement in Ardra makes one "ungrateful, wicked, violent
and proud".
Janis Joplin, the famous singer & musician, has her Moon in Ardra in the 5th house. 5b house
relates to one's creativity and mental inclinations. Her creative output and singing style is very
Ardraish, and some of Varahamihira's harsh opinions do apply to her even though she was a benevolent
type relaying Ardra's higher energies.
***

[page 103]
-&tu-
1J4**1,.*;
M
/. lunawasu Zo"oo' Qemini -t"Zo' (un..,

[page 104]
7.
lPttttsuasa
(20000' Gemini - 3020' Cancer)
In tfu SKy t
Punaruasu, the root of Jupiterian energy, consists of the two bright stars in the constellation of
Gemini, known in modern astronomy as hstor (Alpha-Geminorium) & Pollux (Beta-Geminorium).
With visual magnitudes of 1.58 and L.22 respectively, Castor& folluxare easily visible in the night
sky. They can be located at the top left hand comer above Oion within the constellation of Gemini.
In most ancient cultures these stars were seen as twins (brothers or lovers). The ancient vedic seers
however saw this asterism as a "quiver.of arrows".
9{gtnrc :
Punaruasutranslates into "Good Again", "Wealthy Again" or the "Visible Infinity". The Vasusare
demigods carrying all the desirable qualities like goodness, strength, prosperity etc. (refer to the
Deity section of Dhanistha, the 23rd asterism). The fact that the term "Punarvasu" literally translates
into "Becoming Vasu Again", reveals its first two meanings. We also get an impression of some
positive transformation from darkness into light. This duality and interplay between the opposites is
the essence of Punarvasu. Its "visible infinity" meaning is more profound and relates to its ruling
deity. r:4.. - 1,\{c

[page 105]
104
Sym6o[:
The most accepted symbol of Punarvasu is a'quiver full of arrows'. Sometimes one single arrow
is taken as its symbol, but in both cases the arrow symbolism dominates the discussion of this
nakshatra.
An arrow has been traditional|y associated with every aspect of human nature and functioning
-arowofdesire,arrowof ambition, Eros'arrow andnottoforgetthearrowoftime. Inall these
cases the arrow is always associated with some sort of movement, striving or objective' The arrows
in the Punarvasu quiver are not normal arrows. They are supposed to be like the divine asfras
(weapons), used in ancient times, which magically return after fulfilling their function or mission.
This conveys the idea of renewal, regenerailon and endless beginnings.
Punarvasu's quiver basically represents energy and resources at one's command' It is up to us
to choose the purpose and timing of their use. Punarvasu thus has a distinction of returning safely
from any mission it undertakes. This mission may be as simple as going to the neighbourhood shop
or as arduous as climbing Mt Everest. The mission can take place on any plane - mental, physical,
emotional, astral or causal. It is Punarvasu's function to ensure safe return to the starting point' No
wonder that Punaruasu became synonymous with'safety' in the eyes of the wise men. Its alternative
symbol, "a house", once again reiterates the idea of safety'
One can also easily infer from the above that Punaruasu has a lot to do with any kind of motion,
movement and searching. All the qualities normally associated with the sign SagitLarius, which also
has an arrow as its symbol, can be applied to Punaruasu as well. The fact that the journey always
ends where one stafted leads us to the idea of a circle. Time and reality are cyclical and not linear,
as most in the modern world believe it to be, The modern Darwinian theory of evolution suggests
that the human race is in a state of unhindered evolution by the process of natural selection' This
implies that we, as a race, are becoming more intelligent than our ancestors with each passing
generation. The theory fufther suggests that we are in a state of perpetual progress, through linear
time, which only moves forward. This is in opposition to the view held by all ancient civilisations,
who knew that Unn is cyclical, and tiat nature renews itself through perpetual repetiUon. This

[page 106]
105
repetition has a helical (as is the case with DNA strands which make up the genetic code), rather
than a puiely circular nature, but for symbolic purposes the circle has always been used as the
imagery which conveys this eternal re-rllity. Shatabhisha (24th nakshatra) and Punarvasu are the two
main nakshatras which reveal and deal with this aspect of the universal functioning.
Deity :
Aditi, the mother of the 12 Adityas (solar deities), is the main ruling deity of Punarvasu. Aditi
translates into "unbounded". She is often seen as the goddess of abundance. She is a sky goddess
who is said to be the mother of all the godly beings in the universe. In a way she relates to all space.
The manifest universe, as we know, is basically a function of space and time. Space like time has an
infinite quality to it and for all purposes can be taken as unbounded. The "visible infinity" translation
of Punarvasu stafts to make some sense when seen in the above light.
The reality however is that both space and time are finite quantities bounded by the circular
aspect of nature discussed earlier. Aditi or space is the sinequanon for any motion or movement. If
there is no space there is no motion. In iact there can be no concept of existence either. Space has
always been the receptive, feminine principle as opposed to time, which is seen in a more masculine
light, Going by this line of thinking, Aditi should be the mother of all that exists, if it were not for her
silter Diti. Diti, the bounded space, is the mother of all ungodly or demonic beings in the universe.
Diti, like the night, can be seen as dark space, which harbours the dark, mysterior.rs and evil
side of nature. Aditi relates to the space, which like the day, is full of light, and is thus the harbinger
of the benevolent side of nature. Aditi's rulership of Punaruasu impafts it with a maternal, caring,
sensitive, reasonable and accommodating approach. Just like the space which accommodates all,
Punarvasu is very accommodating of people, situations, circumstances and energies.

[page 107]
106
A{ature U functianffig :
In the universal scheme of things, Punaruasu relates to "vasfuva prapana shakti" - the power to
gain or retrieve objects or objectives. Its main theme is triumphant return and renewal. The arrow
which hits its target in Ardra now returns back. Its symbolism has wind, which carries the clouds
above and rain, which revitalizes the plants below. Just like the rain, Punaruasu brings renewal.
Another way of seeing this is that the wind carries the clouds to where they need to be after the rain
is over.
The essence of Punaruasu's nature and functioning lies in two words, "Nufturing" and "Harmony".
Since it represents the first light after the storm, Punaryasu represents harmonious mnditions in
nature. Nature seems to be at its happiest in the period after a storm, when the chirping of birds and
the fresh smell from the rejuvenated earth creates abuzzinthe air. Consequently, Punaruasu represents
favourable conditions for life to thrive on all levels. The inherent calm of this nakshatra makes
natives strongly under its influence, contented people, who get satisfied easily. They believe in living
a simple, spiritual life and strive hard to get rid of any negative energies, feelings or thoughts, which
may obstruct their evolutionary process.
Punarvasu is a naKhatra where the interplay of the mental with the emotional is at its most
fascinating, as both have the same amount of strength. In the previous nakshatra, Ardra, the mental
is much stronger, while the emotional part is in the process of developing. The quality which arises
out of this fine balance of mental and emotional is "reasonability". Punaruasu represents the stage in
life when a child outgrows its tempestuous and naughtiness and settles into a mindset which is more
aware of the needs of others. This usually takes place between the ages of '9' and '14'. Children at
this age have the unique ability to live in the moment and are friendly and good natured at the same
time. This ability is retained by those under strong influence of this nakshatra throughout their lives.
'9'to'14'are the right age to get a child interested in spiritual writings and philosophies, as they are
more likely to take them seriously. Punarvasu is related to all kinds of spiritual practices meant to
foster self understanding and enlightenment. The interplay of mental and emotional gives rise to a
very active, profound and inspired imagination. Putmryasu natives th:s excel in arts like poetry and
writing.

[page 108]
107
Those with Punaruasu rising on the Ascendant are usually of short to middle stature, have a
serene countenance and benevolent expression. One can refer to the many images of Rama,
incarnation of Vishnu, to understand the appearance of this nakshatra (especially the part which lies
in Cancer). The words - quiet, patient devout, temperance, contrary views, amiability, adaptability,
self-understanding and nobility sum up Punarvasu natives essential nature and functioning. It must
be mentioned th.at Punarvasu's generosity is conditional and work on the principle of "give and
take". This part of their nature actually accounts for their safety in today's tumultuous times.
. Punaruasu natives usually lack the strong mental capacity of Ardra and have a much simpler
approach to life. They lack foresight, a negative quality which gets them into complications, but they
are always lucky to get out of them unscathed. In fact 'safety' is one of the keywords of this
nakshatra. One can easily rule out any serious misfortune in relation to the significations punarvasu
influences in a nativity. For example, having Ascendant lord placed in Punaruasu would rule out any
serious disease, accidents, bodily malfunctions and so forth. On a whole, punarvasu natives usually
lead comfortable lives filled with intermittent periods of adventure and upheaval.
Punaryasu natives are usually very atbched to their homes, but at the same time are ever
ready to travel if required. In some negative cases, Punarvasu natives may shun travel completely.
Such natives usually end up confused and disillusioned as they have avoided following their natural
life path' Punarvasu natives always need to guard against a tendency to stagnate. Their inward
orientation usually gives them a lack of drive and focus required to attain their goals. Many such
Punarvasu natives can be heard saying statements like, "What's the use?", "Why bother?,' etc. In
other words, they tend to philosophize their inactivity. In its higher aspect, Punarvasu gives a capacity
to achieve its goal no matter how difficult or challenging it is. Just like an arrow fired by a good
bowman, the evolved Punarvasu types never miss their mark
One strange quality of Punarvasu is that evefihing happens in two goes for the natives under
its strong influence. They almost always tend to fail or not get far in their first attempt at any pursuit,
but the funny paft is that they almost always succeed if they try a second time. This relates to the
opposing natures of the two stars, Castor and Pollux, which make up the constellation of punarvasu.

[page 109]
108
These stars are regarded as twin brothers, one of whom (Castor) is naughty and cruel, and the other
(pollux) is generous and wise. Punarvasu natives tend to encounter the first one in their first try and
the latter one in their second try.
It is Castor, which creates all types of losses for Punarvasu natives, while Pollux brings back all
that is lost. Thus punaruasu, in keeping with its name banslation "G@d Again", relates to all kinds of
repetition and recycling. In its negative aspect, Punaruasu nattves find it hard to discard anything
just because they think that it might serue some purpose in some future time' The more evolved
souls howeve[ know when to let go of things which have outlived their usefulness.
Common English words like "punctual", "punitive", "pun", "puny" seem to have their root in the
word "punarvasu". We can easily see that their meanings relate to Punaruasu's functioning at some
level or the other.
Modc of functUning :
punarvasu is considered to be a Passive nakshatra. Space by itself is a very passive entity'
Unless stirred by some external agency, Punarvasu's philosophy is very much to "just be". It requires
counge to stick to one's life path and finish off the task assigned to one. Punaruasu has been
blessed with a moveable quality for that very purpose. However in its negative aspect, it can fail to
6gmmence the journey of fulfilling one's life purpose through procrastination, excessive idealism or
pure laziness. The arrow usually has no problem travelling after it has been shot from an outstretched
bow, but sometimes the archer may lack the strength or resolution to even string his bow. This is
what happen d to Arjuna (character from the Vedic epic "The Mahabharata'2 at the very beginning
of the epic world war known as Mahabharata. He rdused to string his bow because of his idealistic
compassion towards his kith and kin.

[page 110]
109
Caste
It belongs to the Vaishya or Merchapt caste. This classification obviously comes about because
of its close association with the mercantile planet, Mercury. All of Punarvasu's generosity and kindness
lie within the framework of reasonability. Punarvasu works on the principle of reciprocation' In
today's world one has to be reasonable with one's generosity as people are bound to take undue
advantage of you. It is probably this adherence to a reciprocal trader's mentality, which accounts for
the fact that Punarvasu natives rarely get their hands burnt. Punarvasu is supposed to be the safest
among nakshatras.
Qentur :
It is a Male nakshatra. This classification must relate to its strong connection with the male
planet Jupiter. Punarvasu has a feminine overseer in Aditi, but its impulses and functioning are
masculine as illustrated in the nakshatra's image of the boy shooting the anow.
tsodyports d t{utrwr (Ayttruedb Corutitution) :
Fingers and Nose are the body parts related to this nakshatra. The contemporary guitar player
limi Hendrix, who has his Ascendant lord Jupiter placed in Punarvasu, sings in one of his songs -
"Feeling, sweet feeling, drops from my fingers, my fingers.'.''
It is a primarily "Vata" (airy) nakshatra. This definitely relates to its association with the Vata
planet Mercury. Punarvasu represents space and Vata is the humor whirlr gets closest to space or
nothingness. l
Directi.on :
It is related primarily to the arc made by west, north and north east.

[page 111]
110
ealos (@wterc)
The first pada or quafter of this asterism 20o 00' - 23 20' Gemini, falls in Aries Navamsa and is
ruled by Mars. This pada relates to the moveable, adventurous and floneering side of Punarvasu.
Focus here is on friendships, goals and group work.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 23o 20' - 260 40'Gemini, falls in Taurus Navamsa
ruled by Venus. This pada relates to the materialistic, earthy and fixed aspect of Punaruasu. It is
connected with hotels, restaurants, tourism, import and expoft industry.
The third pada or quafter of this asterism 260 40' - 30o 0O' Gemini, falls in Gemini Navamsa
ruled by Mercury. The focus here is on mental activities, imagination and science. Since this is a
Vargottama pada, planets placed here give strong results, especially in the mental/intellectual realm.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 00o 00' - 3" 20' Cancer, falls in Cancer Navamsa
ruled by Moon. This pada is considered to be one of the strongest and most beneficent parts of the
whole zodiac. Planets placed here are Vargottama and Pushkara Navamsa both. This is a maternal,
nurturing and expansive pada, which brings out the mothering quality of Punarvasu to the fullest.
Jupiter finds its maximum exaltation here.
lProfusions :
Trades & Sales people of all types; Artisans; Fairy Tale Writers; Writers dealing with Astrology &
other Esoteric Subjects; Visionaries; All professions involving Travel & Tourism; Recycling ExperG;
Hotel & Restaurant Industry; Transport Industry; House Construction Companies; Architects; Alt
Science related professions; Civil Engineers; Teachers in Schools, Colleges & Universities; Psychologists;
Philosophers; Priests, Monks & Gurus; Preachers involved with self-enhancement techniques;
Importers & Expofters; Historians; Antique Dealers; Farmerc; Cattle & Sheep Farmers; All professions
requiring an innovative approach; Communications Jobs; Radio & Telephone Industry; Courier
Companies; Postal Service; Newspaper Industry; Mail Order & Home Delivery Businesses; Landlords;
Keepers of Temples, Churches and other Religious Buildings; Home Maintenance Services; Archery

[page 112]
111
& Target Shooting; All sports involving use of hands; Patriots; Aviators; Astronauts & All Space/
Satellite Professions.
9falu :
Areas near Ponds, Lakes & Rivers; Farmlands; Pilgrimage Spots; Villages & Small Towns; Post
ffices; Transportation Places like Bus Stations & Train Stations, Airports; Space Stations; Renovated
Buildings; Public Parks; Homes; Home Land; Hostels; Hotels, Bed & Breakfast Places, Inns, Motels
etc. ; Restaurants; Temples & Treasuries; Markets; Rehabilitation Centres; Missions; Educational
Institutions; Public & PoliticalAssembly Places; Roads; Science Museurns; Antique Shops; Community
juna ('Esserrce) and tsttuta (Etement)
It is supposed to be a Sattwic nakshatra. The reason behind this classification can be easily
assessed from Punaruasu's association with Jupiter, a primarily sattwic planet. The qualities which
make it godly, are the qualities which make it sattwic as well, However its most sattwic quality.is that
it never deliberately means harm to anyone.
It belongs to the Water element. Its association with the watery planet Jupiter, accounts for its
watery quality. Punarvasu is a nakshatra akin to nourishing, nurturing and other such qualities
associated with the water element.
$ana EWd
It is considered a Deua or godly nakshatra, It is clear from its nature and functioning that it is
a very benign, generous, kindly and compassionate nakshatra. All these qualities are seen as being
godly by ancient Vedic texts. The first ray of sunlight after a storm must obviously relate to the
divinity aspect of nature and creation.

[page 113]
112
Orientation ond DisPosition :
It is a Level nakshatra. The level nakshatras are neither too expansive nor too contracting. In
other words, they have a sense of balance and reasonability. It is clear from Punarvasu's nature and
functioning that it is a very balanced and reasonable nakshatra and thus fits this classification
perfectly. Another way to see this, is that the archer needs to keep a level posture and level state of
mind in order to hit its target.
Itisa Chanor moveable nakshatra. As we have discussed in its Nature & Functioning, Punarvasu
is related with all types of movement, especially the kind which ends where it begins. It is the first
among the moveable nakshatras, even though Mrigashira can be said to be moveable in some
respects. :
[.unar Montfr d Dag :
It relates to the first half of the lunar month of Pausha, which usually falls in the solar month of
December, i.e. late December.
punarvasu is also related to the Ashtami (8h tithi or day) of the waxing and waning phases of
the Moon's monthly cYcle.
Attspiciotu Actiaities :
Traveling & Exploring; Making Pilgrimages; Taking Medicines & all Healing Activities; Good for
,'Starting Over Again" in Projects, Relationships etc.; All Agricultuml & Gardening Activities; All activities
requiring Imagination & Innovation; Buying Cars & Homes; Starting work on a building; Starting
Educational Activities; Auspicious for Marriage; Good for dealing with Children; Philanthropic Activities
like Donations, Teaching etc; Good for Spiritual Activities like Fasting, Installing Altars, Meditation &
Self Reflection; A time fo_l e4joylng-life's simple pleasures; Very good for worship of the.divine
Mother Goddess.

[page 114]
113
Inauspitious Actiaitits :
Unfavourable for Borrowing or Lending Money; Legal Activities or other activities requiring
pushiness or conflict.
Qfanetary fu.fzr :
Jupiter is the main planetary ruler of this nakshatra. In fact, Jupiterian energy is heralded by
this nakshatra. It is the first nakshatra where a sense of ethics is developed and the focus shifts from
the self to communal well-bein.r. Jupiterian energy manifests itself through a sense of accommodation,
a quality which makes this the most reasonable amongst the nakshatras. As mentioned earlier,
Punaruasu represents the stage in life when a child outgrows its tempestuous and naughtiness and
settles into a mindset which is more aware of the needs of others.
Since this nakshaba hlls in the signs of Mercury and Moon, both these planets are also associated
with this nakshatra. Mercury relates to the communicating and moveable aspect of this nakshatra,
while Moon relates to its nufturing, mothering quality and its connection with the universal mother
principle.
Conjunctions like Jupiter/Moon, Jupiter/Mercury and Jupiter/Moon/Mercury carry an energy
simhr to that of Punarvasu.
All planets do well in this nakshatra, especially if Jupiter is well placed in the horoscope.
'louek anl A[pfrabe* :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 20o 00' -23o 20' Gemini corresponds to "Kay" as in
Katie.
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 23o 20' - 26" 40' Gemini corresponds to "Ko" as in
Kodak.

[page 115]
114
The third pada or quafter of this asterism 26"40 ' - 30o 00' Gemini corresponds to "Ha" as in
Haft.
The fourth pada or quafter of this asterism 00" 00' - 3" 20' Gemini corresponds to "Hee" as in
Hinano.
In the Sanskrit alphabet Punarvasu corresponds to "Om" and "Aum", consequently its mantras
are "Om" and "Aum". It is interesting to note that the beginning sound of the universe, which is most
respectd by all Vedic texts, is the root sound of this nakshatra. This once again reiterates its strong
relation with the beginning of material manifestation.
Seren{ type anl Compati|i[ity :
Its sexual animal is a Cat. Cats are independent creatures and this attitude permeates the
sexuaf nature of Punarvasu. Punaruasu can be aggressive sexually, but not to the extent of Ashlesha
(the other cat nakshatra), which is the asterism it is most compatible with.
For sexual & marital compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the tables on pages 457
&458.
Esoterb :
Being the 7s nakshatra, Punarvasu relates to the balancing aspect of nature. Space is the
empty cloth on which the patterns of the universe are embroidered. Punaruasu allows for manifestation
by providing a medium. Those familiar with chemistry will realize that the medium is always a
balancing element in any reaction. At another level Punarvasu gives souls a chance to redeem
themselves from whatever negative actions they might have done in the past. It is the most efficient
karma recycler amongst the nakshatras. Due to its relationship with Aditi, mother of the gods,
Punarvasu is a very nufturing nakshatra, which always gives a second chance. It harmonizes the
opposing tendencies inherent in the universal scheme.

[page 116]
115
The twins Castor and Pollux represent two extreme sides of human nature and Punarvasu
establishes a happy medium. It can be said that Vishnu Tattwabegins in Punarvasu. This is the first
nakhatra where a sense of harmony and equilibrium is established between the existing elemental
forces on all planes of existence. None of the nakshatras prior to Punaruasu engage in the above
mentioned task. Rama, the 8th incarnation of Vishnu, was born with Punaruasu rising and his whole
life was nothing but an effott to create an equilibrium on planet Earth in his day and age.
' The two sons of Rama, Luvand Kush are the archetypal twin brothers who have been used to
symbolize the twin stars Castor and Pollux through different names in various cultures. Their reign
on Eafth, after they took over from their father, is regarded as one of the most peaceful tjmes in the
tumultuous history of Prithvi (Mother).
Qotra (Cehst'ut Lineage) :
This nakhatra is related to the Sage Kratu, one of the seven celestialsages looking after the
affairs of our galaxy. The name of this sage translates into "the inspirer". Punaruasu, because of its
association with Jupiter, has a preachy and inspiring quality about it. Punarvasu inspires by setting
an example through its inner gentleness.
fumedi"af :
For those suffering from bad effects resulting from afflictions to this nakshatra, the best remedial
measure is worship of any goddess figurine like Durga, Laxmi, Saraswafii Aditi etc.
Repetition of the root mantras of this nakshatra - "Om" or "Aum" 108 times when Moon
transits this nakshatra and in its corresponding lunar month is sure to reduce suffering and bring
enlightenment into a person's life.
Persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this nakshatra can also increase the
good effects through the above menUoned ways. It is helpful for them to ralear green, yellow and

[page 117]
116
white. They should use its directions, lunar month and the days when Moon transits Punaruasu to
undertake all important actions.
E4antph :
Rama, incarnation of Vishnu in the Silver Age and widely celebrated and hailed in the Vedic
thought as the perfect man, was born with Punarvasu rising. His life, which is documented in the
fegendary epic "Ramayana", sheds light on the nature and functionings of Punaruasu. He always got
everything right only in two goes (he lost his kingdom and wife and regained them), as suggested by
the expression "good again".
Misceffaneous :
' According to Varahamihira, Moon's placement in Punaruasu makes one "easily contented, self-
controlled, slow-witted, fortunate and of good character". Our example Rama has his Moon placed
in Punaryasu as well and all of the above-mentioned attributes fit him petfectly.
***

[page 118]
s. lushya ,"zo' (un"., - 16"+0' (^n"",

[page 119]
8.
%figo
(3020' Gncer - 16o40' Cancer)
In tfu SkA t
Pushya comprises of three stars in the constellation of Cancer, known in modern astronomy as
Theta-Gncri, Gamma-Cancri& Eta-Cancri. These are not very bright stars, as the brightest among
them has a visual magnitude of 4.57. They, however, house the globuler star cluster known as M-44.
It is very clear that the ancient Vedic seers were privy to some knowledge about our neighbouring
stars which we don't ascribe the same importance to. These stars are hardly visible to the naked
eye. The ancient seers saw these three stars as resembling an'udder of a cow'. The interesting thing
to note is that they didn't choose the relatively bright stars normally associated with the sign of
Cancer.
fr{unc :
Pushya translates into the "Nourisher", the "Nufturer" or the "Yielding". This simple name
carries within itself the essence of this nakshatra. Some scholars are of the opinion that Pushya also
translates into "a flower". The flower conveys the same sense of gentleness and nourishment as the
other translations.
Pushya's ancient name is "Tishyan, which translates into auspicious. "Sidhya" meaning
'prosperous'is another name associated with this nakshatra. We can see that all these names are
;
drawn from a @mmon qssence of benevolence.

[page 120]
120
Sym6o[ :
Pushya's main symbol is the 'milk yielding udder of a cow'. We have already seen that the
ancient seers saw its three stars as representing a cowb udder. Once we combine this symbol with
its name, all the indications of this nakshatra are immediately clear ie. its propensity and ability to
nourish, nufture, care and give freely on all planes of existence.
.$r-
Cows, as we know, provide their milk to others besides their own calf unselfishly. Cows are also
a universal symbol of motherhood and were highly revered, especially in the ancient Vedic society.
In India it is still considered the holiest amongst all animals. All the notions of fertility and productivity
that are related to the earth on a material plane fall under the domain of this nakshatra. In many
ancient legends, the earth is often equated with a cow.
Cows are intimately connected with the sign Taurus. This nakshatra is intimately connected
with the sign Taurus and its qualities, even though it does not fall in that sign. As we shall find later,
Moon in Taurus placement in a chart carries an energy similar to the energies of this nakshatra.
The practice of agriculture, the root of all civilization, can be equated with the domestication
and milking of cows. From a universal perspective, it represents the power of the feminine goddess
energy to provide for whatever is required. The milk which comes from the cow's udder represents
all kinds 6f varied things like lifeforce, vitality and creativity. One can only give if one can produce
and this nakshatra relates to all kinds of productive forces operating within our universe.
Its alternative symbol is a'wheel'. The'wheel' is an ancient symbol signifying movement in all
its aspects, especially the movement of time. It can be seen as a motif for progress achieved in the
course of time. The idea of progress or development always involves the passage of time. This
nakshatra is very aware of the proper utilization of the time principle to achieve its productive,
creative and nurturing objectives. From the modern day point of view, we can see that the use of
automobiles have made people's lives much simpler than they used to be. This is just one of the
numerous gifts from this liberal nakshatra.

[page 121]
t21
Wheel is also an archetypal symbol for civilization, which once again emphasizes the prosperous,
courteous and refined nature of this nakshatra. There's no place for brutality, savagery vulgarity or
animalistic behaviour in this nakshatra. Another obscure symbol of this nakshatra is a 'circle'. This
generally reflects the circular essence of this asterism. This nakshatra is related to curves of all
types. Breasts, the Moon, the Earth and a Cow's Udder are all circular and rounded. Natives with
Pushya prominent in their charts gsually show an obssessive streak for round things.
Some scholars ascribe a 'flower' to be one of Pushya's symbols. As we have already seen,
flowering is one of the translations of Pushya. Pushya represents a flowering process of any type.
For example, human beings are supposed to flower at the age of sixteen. The term "sweet sixteen"
is usually used to describe this happy, cheerful, carefree period where the body, mind and emotions
have matured or blossomed enough to make us step out of childhood. It is interesting to note that
the sixteenth year is regarded as the maturation age of Jupiter, the planet most closely associated
with this nakshatra.
Deity :
Brihaspati, the guru, priest and chief advisor of the gods, is the presiding deity of this nakshatra.
Since he is the same as the planet Jupiter as understood in astrology, all the attributes and significations
associated with Jupiter apply to him as well. It is not very hard to correlate Jupiter's basic nature
with the kind and caring disposition of this nakshatra. All of Jupiter's benevolence such as generosity,
compassion, joyfulness and optimism are manifested through this nakhatra. It is interesting to note
that Jupiter relays all of its good qualities much more through this nakshatra in comparison to the
nakhatras it is the planetary ruler of. This is very similar to the case of Moon reflecting most of its
qualities through Mrigasira instead of the nakshatras it actually rules.
This point reveals the fact that the ruling deity is always more impoftant than the planetary
ruler when it comes to understanding the crux of any nakhatra.

[page 122]
122
Afature A funrtioning :
pushya is that place on our journey where we can rest safely and peacefully without anything
to fear. It is the most nourishing of all nakshatras and brings us back to that state in our infancy
where we are safely nestled in our mother's arms. That is why natives strongly ruled by Pushya are
very maternal, kind, helpful, generous, protective and nourishing. They often end up in comfoftable
positions in lite. Pushya relates to breasts and this conjures up the expression "Milk of human
kindness". Kindness is what this nakshatra is all about. Pushya is a blissful and soothing nakshatra
and the natives they produce are much sought after by others for their friendship and aid. Being
ruled by Satum, Pushya natives ane very reliable, dependable stalwarts, who one can always turn to
in times of need.
pushya is simply the most loved and benign of all nakshatras. Like its neighbour Purnavasu, it
loves life and expresses much contentment and sense of wellbeing, but it has the advantage of
being able to manifest this fullness and expansiveness on the material plane, therefore giving rise to
great material comfort and prosperity. This is due to the concrete nature of its ruler Saturn.
pushya in its positive aspect is extremely nourishing and its energies, wherever they are directed,
produce great expansion and growth. This is true for any area of life whether it be in the emotional
realm, inone's creagvity, spiritual development or on the material plane. As this nakshatra completely
resides in Cancer, a sense of family, home and community are strong in Pushya natives'
On a less evolved level, these natives will be very generous and protective of kith and kin and
ever ready to lend a helping hand to those in their immediate community, but may fail to see the
bigger picture. On a higher level, evolved souls under its influence, will embrace the whole world as
their family, nourishing the earth urith their chosen talents and ceaseless gifu of caring. Pushya
qualities of love, emotional wholeness, calmness, soothing, generosity and richness manifest through
such souls with ease.
The negative side of this nakshatra makes one so comfortable in their own world, that they can
become rigid, narrowminded and orthodox in their attitudes towards anything or anyone outside of

[page 123]
123
it, pafticularly in matters of religion, culture or other social conventions. Pushya has very few negative
qualities attached to it, except the danger of it becoming overtly prejudiced, protective or bigoted.
Suspicion and caution arises towards anything that does not fit its highly structured views or opinions.
Pushya expressds all the'square{ike'aspects of its ruler Saturn and the number "4" (relating to
the fourth sign Cancer). Therefore it always tries to take a balanced and even approach to things. It
has a sense of realism and sanity to it and will always react reasonably to most situations and
problems, which is why it is the most helpful among ttre nakshatras. Helpfulness is its primary
concern.
Natives here are highly productive and work patiently towards their goals. There is a sense of
containment and safety inherent in this nakshatra, similar to the safety and containment inherent in
the nakshatra Shatabhishak. The only difference is that Pushya's containment, shelter and safety
arises from a very trusting situation, and Shatabhishak's arises out of a need for secrecy, and many
a times, from a certain mistrust.
This number "4" influence is seen in Pushya's respect for its roots, foundations and traditions.
It has more to do with respecting the conservative outer traditions of culture and religion, than the
inner esoteric aspects of spirituality, which is more associated with the latter nakshatras. Jupiter is
exalted in Ptrshya giving these natives a strong sense of ethics. They like to do the right thing and
abide by accepted standards and laws. They are shining examples of hospitality, decency, couftesy,
etiquette and are not likely to behave in any vulgar or eltreme manner. However, in its negative
aspect, Pushya can make one ledtargic, needy, dependent and prone to addictions due to a lack of
will power. If afflicted, Pushya natives tend to get victimized easily.
When this nakshatra influences the appearance of a native, it gives fleshy features, prominent
chest/breasts, round faces and luminous lustre. Natives under its influence put on fat easily and are
prone to bronchial disorders. They have a liking for good food, comfort and social enjoyment. They
also like to surround themselves with material luxuries of all kinds. They are gentle, patien! docile
creatures who are very attached to their family, especially the mother or mother figures.

[page 124]
124
In the universal scheme of things, Pushya relates lo 'brahmauarchasa shakti" - the power to
harness the creative powers of Brahma (the universal creator), Its symbolism has sacrificial offierings
above and the worshipper below. This re-emphasizes the priestly aspect of Pushya, where one does
outer rituafs like homa and yagya to get the favour of celestial entities and divine powers in general.
In keeping with its basic nature and disposition, ancient Vedic seers saw this as a Passive
asterism. If we just picture the behaviour of a cow in our mind, we will come to understand the
passive aspect of Pushya. Even though it is productive, it does not display the restlessness other
fight nakshatras like ,Ashvini and Hasta have. Pushya has a much more stable energy and tends to
function without fuss. However, when occupied by afflicted planets, it can promote laziness, listlessness
and paralyzing idealism.
Caste :
It belongs tothe Kshatriya or warrior caste. It is perplexing why this seemingly brahminical
(priestly) nakshatra should be classified in this category by the ancient seers. It is probably because
of Pushya's intense involvement in politics and rulership, which is responsible for this classification.
Pofitics and rulership is the dharma of the Kshatriya caste. Even Brihaspati, the ruling deity of
Pushya, is supposed to have mastery over politics more than any other subject.
Qend.er :
It is a Male nakshatra. This is easily derivable from the fact that Brihaspati, a male deity, has the
primary rulership of this nakshatra. Pushya, however, has a sensitive feminine side to it as exemplified
by its strong relationship with cows. Cows are gentle, yielding and productive creatures. In countries
like India, cgws are treated with utmost reverance.
Modz of functUning :

[page 125]
125
Bodgpats (t g{umor (fuptuediL Corutitutbn) :
The bodyparts it relates to the most are the Mouth and Face. Pushya is supposed to be intimately
connected with facial expressions. Any affliction to Pushya therefore can limit our facial expressiveness
or project the wrong image.
One may infer that because the Kshatriya class is predominantly effected by the ,'pitta,, (fiery)
humor, the ancient seers ascribed the pitta humor to Pushya. They might, however, have had more
direct cognition of Pusfrya's relationship with the digestive fires in the body and the fury pranic airs.
Direction :
It is related to the directional arc that ranges from west to north.
Ea{as (Qrcrters)
The first pada or quafter of this asterism 30 20' - 6o 40' Cancer, falls in Leo Navamsa ruled by
Sun. The first pada concerns itself with achievemen! limelight, wealth and pride in one,s family or
ancestry' The luminaries, especially, give strong positive results in this pada. They make the native
a father or mother figure or the native receives help from such figures
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 60 40' - 10o 00' Cancer, falls in Mrgo Navamsa ruled
by Mercury. The hardworking, seruice aspect of Pushya finds expression here. Since this is a pushkara
Navamsa pada, all planets barring Venus, give good results here, at least on the material plane. This
pada can be called the Cook of the Zodiac.
The third pada or quafter of this asterism 10o 00' - 13o 20' Cancer, falls in Libra Navamsa ruled
by Venus. The focus here is on home, comforts, luxury and sociability. Superficiality and conformity
is the downside of this pada. Moon, Mercury venus and satum do well here.
The foutth pada or quafter of this asterism 13o 20' - 16o 40' Cancer, falls in Scorpio Navamsa
ruled by Mars' This pada relates to the esoteric side of Pushya, which seeks connections with the

[page 126]
126
celestial beings in the other world. It is the pada of mantras and rituals. In its negative aspect, most
of pushyat negative traits like dependance, victimization and bigotry flnd expression through this
pada. Only unaffiicted Jupiter and Venus do well in this pada.
grofusiotu :
All those connected with the Dairy Industry; Food and Drink Merchants of all types; Politicians'
Rulers & Aristocrats; Caterers and Hoteliers; All those in the Restaurant Business; Clergy, Nuns'
priests, Gurus, Spiritual Teachers; Psychologists, Counsellors and Psychotherapists; Managers; Those
associated with Charitable Organizations; Professional Hosts & Hostesses; River and Lake related
professions; Teachers and Education Experts; Child Care Professionals: Mothers; All Care Professions;
Artisans; Those involved in all kinds of Business and Creative Activities requiring Finesse; Real Estate
Agents; Farmers & Gardeners; Those making a living out of Orthodoxy, Traditionalism and Religious
Bigotry.
9[aces :
Rivers, Docks, Wells, Reservoirs, Fountains, Pools, Canals; Boats and House Boats; Public Places;
Nests; Homes; Breweries; Women's House Quafters, Hostels and Residences in general; Aquariums;
Temples & Churches; Hotels & Restaurants; Foster Homes; Child Care Centres; Maternity Hospitals;
Schools; Dairy Factories & Dairy Farmsl Laundromats; Manors & Public, Government buildings like
parliament etc.; Charity Organizations; All places connected to the above professions'
Quna ('Essenre) and Tattua (Efpment) :
It is supposed to be a Tamasicnakhatra. One can only say that the ancient seers were trying
to highlight the inertia aspect of Pushya through this classification. It may relate to the involvement
of Saturn with this nakshatra. Pushya, just like the demi-gods Indra and his entourage, has an often

[page 127]
127
overlooked indulgent, deceptive, cowardly, over idealistic, procrastinating and hyper aggressive side
to it. A lot depends on the basic nature of the planet occupying Pushya'
For example, if Saturn (a natural malefic) having the rulership of the 6h house in a chart
(a malefic house) is placed in Pushya, then Pushya's tamasic side will be in display. However if Moon
(a natural benefic) having the rulership of good houses is placed in Pushya, the benevolent,
compassionate and nurturing side of Pushya will be expressed'
It belongs to the water element. The fact that Moon and Jupiter are primarily water planets
makes Pushya a primarily watery nakhatra. Even Brihaspati, its ruling deity is often portrayed as a
fat bellied watery tYPe'
gana Eypt)
It is considered a Divine nakshatra. It is appropriate that a nakshatra which is said to harbour
all benevolent qualities should be seen as a representation of divinity'
OriBntation U DisPosition :
It is afi Upward Looking nakshatra in keeping with its naturalexpansive nature. This is a nakshatra
signiffing increase and expansion. Planets placed in Pushya usually signify increase and expansion
relating to the areas in the chart governed by that planet. It is said that any activity started when
Moon is tnnsitting this nakshatra will never fail' l
It is a Light and Swift nakshatra. lust like Aswini, Pushya is related to quick thinking and is
supposed to be good for all activiges requiring quickness of mind and body' This is probably one of
the reasons why pushya is regarded as one ofthe best nakshatras for all kinds oftrade and business.

[page 128]
128
Lunqr Montfi U Day :
It relates to the second half of the lunar month of Pausha which usually falls in January.
Pushya is also related to the Dashami (10t' tithi or day) of the waxing and waning phases of the
Moon's monthly cycle.
Auspicious Actirtit ies :
The best nakshatra for starting anything; Pafties, Celebrations, Artistic & Creative activities
especially Music and Dancing; Travelling; Dealing with Enemies (enemies are at their weakest in
Pushya and cannot cause much harm); Seeking Legal Aid; Financial planning & Transactions; Cooking
& Food preparation; Gardening; Adoption & Purchasing Pets; All activities related to Children; All
Healing, Soothing and Nourishing activities in general; Religious or Spiritual Endeavours like Initiations;
Spending time with one's Mother; Good for worshipping Mother Goddess energies; Laying Foundation
Stones and Starting Construction; Seeking help in general.
Inauspicious Actirliti&s
Marriage is just about the only activity which is not seen favourable under this nakshatra;
Generally unfavourable for harsh, cruel and negative activities.
etarutary fu.fer :
The planetary influences affecting this nakshatra are Moon and Saturn. Saturn is its main
planetary ruler. This comes more of a surprise in comparison to the planetary rulers of other nakshatras.
The association of Saturn with Pushya reveals the hidden side of Saturn's functioning - ib ability for
grounded nurturing and painstaking care. Saturn nurtures through conseruation, perseverance and
limitations.

[page 129]
129
Moon represents emotions and Saturn represents stability and so the keyword here is "emotional
stability". Moon is the mind and Saturn represents matter, which makes Pushya the asterism which
connects mind with matter. This is the reason why it can give easy material expansion on the
dictates of the mind.
It is important to consider Jupiteq the ruling deity of Pushya, in the equation here, because by
itself the combining of energies of Moon and Saturn is likely to give melancholy and depression more
than anything else. It is Jupiter's energies which make Pushya a very well balanced nakhatra. In its
negative aspect however, the same Jupiterian energy manifests as dogmatism, shallowness and
bigotry. On a higher level, Moon/Saturn/Jupiter influence together allow one to shape an idyllic
world.
Saturn is a mass planner and so is Moon, a fact which makes Pushya the most mass-orientated
of nakshatras. On a positive level, both Moon and Saturn promote the mindset and values which
help foster an idealized civilized society. Moon and Saturn in their negative aspect make the masses
tow the line, even in times when the ruling forces are dark and corrupt. Those with strong Moon-
Saturn in their charts become mass leaders in today's times.
Moon/Saturn/Jupiter conjunction in a horoscope carry energies similar to Pushya. A well placed
Moon, Jupiter, Sun, VenLrs and Saturn give excellent results when placed in Pushya. Mercury Mars
and the nodes do not give good results in this nakshatra.
'lloraefs and Alpfiabe* :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 30 20' - 6" 40' Cancer corresponds to "Hoo" as in
Hootchie.
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 60 40' - 10o 00' Cancer corresponds to "He" as in
Helen.

[page 130]
130
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 10o 00' - 13o 20' Cancer corresponds to "Ho" as in
Hogan.
The fourtr pada or quafter ofthis asterism 13" 20' - 15o 40' Cancer corresponds to "Dah" as in
Darwin.
In the Sanskrit alphabet Pushya corresponds to "lGu, and consequently its mantra is "Om
lGm".
SeryoI type an{ Compatihility :
Its sexual animal is a Goat. Despite the fact that its sexual animal is not seen as an emblem of
sexuality, Pushya is supposed to be adept at all kinds of sensual and sexual activities. Its sexuality is
more playful as opposed to intense.
For sexual & marital compatibility with other nakshatras, please refer to the tables on pages
457 & 458.
lEsoterb :
Brihgspati, the priest of the gods, is the lord of mantras and all types of initiations like yagyas
etc. He relates to the waters of inner life which nourish the soul. Pushya's spirituality relates to a
high level of emotional maturity. Its emoiional strength finds outward manifestation through powerful
speech. Words generated from this nakshatra carry a ceftain spiritual energy, which tend to affect
others on a deep level.
. An ancient Vedic legend related to Kamadhenu (a wish fulfilling cow), reveals alot about Pushya
on all levels of its functioning:-
"A sage named Vashishtahad a cow named Kamadhenu. A king along with his hundred brothers
was hunting in the forest, when he came close to Vashishta's hermitage and happened to see this
wonderful cow, which could produce anything you wished for. He immediately wanted to have the
cow to himself, so he ordered his soldiers to get it for him.

[page 131]
131
The soldiers couldn't even budge the cow and came back empty handed. The king then decided
to go with his whole army and all of his brothers to get the cow. Kamadhenu, in the meantime, had
returned to her master, Vashishta, and had told him about the king's intentions. Seeing the approaching
army coming, Vashishta ordered her to produce a whole army. Kamadhenu's army defeated the
king's army in a very short spate of time and Vashishta personally killed the king's hundred brothers
through the power of his staff.
The king was spared his life and he left the place bitter and revengeful. He was advised that the
only way he can get stronger than Vashishta was through penance. He performed his penance and
when he felt he had procured enough divine astas (celesUal weapons) and yogic power, he went
back to challenge Vashishta.
In the battle that ensued, all his weapons were effortlessly consumed by Vashishta's staff and
he had to return disappointed and bereft of power. He vowed to himself that he would keep on doing
his penance until he became equal to or better than Vashishta. In the course of his long arduous
penance/ he went through many adventures and most importantly, a change of heaft, which earnt
him the name Vishwamitraor "Friend of the World". By the time he had reached the same brahminical
stature as Vashishta, he had already forgotten about his revenge and it was Vashishta himself, who
conferred on him the title of Brahmarisht) (a Sage fit for Brahmaloka, the abode of the creator
a
Brahma)."
This story reveals the fascinating dynamics between the Brahman (priestly) and Kshatriya (warrior
class). Pushya, as we have seen, is a priestly nakshatra, which belongs to the Kshatriya class and is
thus an ideal playing field for this dynamic. Kshatriyas are supposed to be subservient to the Brahman
class, despite their martial prowess. Because of the power which the true sages and priests have, as
a result of keeping in tune with the universal will, Pushya's strength, confidence and power arise
from its willingness to function as per the dictates of the universal mind. No amount of penance,
hardwork or suffering can make one rise above the smooth effoftless power which aiises out of the
submission to the universal plan,

[page 132]
132
Qotra (Cettstint Lineage) :
This nakshatra is related to the Sage Marichi, one of the seven celestial sages lmking after the
affairs of our galaxy. The name of this sage translates into "the light", which is in keeping with the
light and swift aspect of this nakshatra and relates to the finesse paft of this particular sage.
..
fumedinl :
For those suffering from bad effects resulting from afflictions to this nakshatra, the best remedial
measure is to pay reverence to cows, priests, gurus or brahmins. One can also worship a benign
Mother goddess.
Repetition of the root mantra of this nakshatra - "Om lGm" 108 times when Moon transits this
nakshatra and in the lunar month gf Pausha, is sure to reduce suffering and bring enlightenment
into a person's life.
Fersons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this nakshatra can also increase the
good effects through the above mentioned ways. It is helpful for them to wear colours like white,
yellow, orange and golden shades. They should use its directions, lunar month and the days when
Moon lrapits Pushya to undeftake all important actions.
E4amp[e :
Jimi Hendrix, a contemporary musician who relayed messages through his music, was born
with his Moon in Pushya. He was able to channel the spiritual and nourishing impulses of this
nakshatra through his music, especially in songs like "May This Be Love". Unders[anding his music is
one of the best ways to understand the higher energies of this nakshatra. His ability to nourish and
inspire the ears, heafts and minds of his audience was made possible through his overwhelmingly
fluid creative talents. He had a very high regard for the power of "sound" and often commented on
the "air/noise polluUon" problem in the world. He was constandy trying to help puriff the vibraUons

[page 133]
133
of the planet by manifesting sounds that would convey all the Pushya qualities of love, emotional
wholeness, calmness, soothingness, generosity and richness.
Misceffaneow :
According to Varahamihira, those with Moon in Pushya are "lucky, learned, wealthy, ethical and
of a peaceful nature." This description applies perfectly to our example.
,l**

[page 134]
9. {shlesha | 6"+c'Cun.", -ro"oo, (ur"",

[page 135]
9.
Asfrttsfra
(16040' Cancer - 30000'Cancer)
In tfu Skg t
Ashlesha, the heralder of Mercurial energy, is represented in the night sky by a ring of stars in
the constelfation of Hydra, known in modern astronomy as Epsilon-Hydrae, Delta-Hydne,
Rho-Hydrae, Sigma-Hydrae& Zeta-Hydrae. These stars are easily visible in a dark sky from pollution
free vantage points even though they are not bright stars, as the brightest among them, Zeta-
Hydrae has a visual magnitude of 3.12. In essence the whole of the constellation Hydrae can be
seen to be representative of this asterism.
Afame' :
Ashlesha is a term normally associated with serpent imagery and can be translated as "coiling",
"clinging", "embracing" or "entwining". As we shall discover, all these terms directly define its nature
and functioning. The name is probably derived from the serpent king/god "Shesha".
Sym6o[ :
A'coiled snake' (please refer to the image) is the main symbol of this asterism. Along with its
name, this symbol makes it clear that the essence of Ashlesha lies in the serpent imagery an
imagery which can be found in every surviving ancient civilization.

[page 136]
138
Most cultures see snakes as secretive, creepy/ wily, coldblooded, deceptive, insincere, hypnotic
and poisonous creatures. All these qualities find their way into Ashlesha's functioning. On the positive
side, serpents are seen as semi-divine creatures with access to other worlds. They are supposed to
have great primordial powers of insigh! intuition, perception, wisdom, cunning, concentration and
sexuality.
Ashlesha,'when functioning through its higher aspect, displays these qualities. In the present
times when the worst side of everything is on display, one can usually expect only the forementioned,
negative qualities to predominate.
Brain researchers have now been able to locate the most ancient part of the brain. It is known
as the'R'complex. 'R here stands for'reptilian'. All the above mentioned instinctual, negative qualities
have been ascribed to this paft of the brain. Thus a clear, tangible relation between reptiles, serpents
and these types of human qualities is established.
It is interesting to note that DNA, the building block of our genetic code has a helical, coiled
serpent shape. Thus Ashlesha has a lot to do with genetic heritage, the karma we have brought frorn
previous lives and the scope of changes we are allowed to make in the present one.
Deity
Ashlesha is supposed to be ruled by the celestial serpent kingdom as a whole. In Vedic mythology,
Nagas (half serpenVhalf-human creatures) and other typel of serpent beings abound throughout all
the fourteen lolcas (realms of existence). In some of the legends, these beings are supposed to
reside on the earthly plane as well as under lakes, rivers or ocean beds. Mystery being one of basic
attributes of Ashlesha, it is no wonder then that all of these beings are shrouded in mystery. The
legends however make it clear that the serpent beings or forces were necessary for the proper
functioning of universal affairs. The readers can refer to the "Churning of the Ocean Legend" in the
author's previous work 'The Rahu-Ketu Erryrien@" SagBi publications, India or 'The Key Of Life"
Lotus Press, USA.

[page 137]
139
Even Vishnualways incarnates on eafth with his serpent guard Shesha. When Vishnu incarnated
as Rama, Shesha incarnated as Lakhmana. It is interesting to note that Lakshmana was born with
Ashlesha rising on his Ascendant. His character reflects many of the qualiUes of Ashlesha (refer to
the Vedic fegend- 'The Ramayana').
The negative type of serpents however need to be suMued and won over, just like the lower
negative aspecs of human nature are won over through knowledge, wisdom and understanding.
Krishnab killing of the many headed snake called Kaliya (refer to the Vedic legend- 'The Mahabharab')
and in the Greek legend, HerculeSKlling of the Delphi*rpent illustrate this poinL
The only other nakshatra directly associated with serpent energy is tJttarabhadrapda. Usually
it is noticed that the higher, more refined aspects of serpent energy are displayed there, while
Ashfesha epitomizes the more primordial and instinctual part of the serpent symbolism. Since Pabla
Loka (the realm ruled by serpent beings lying just below the earthly plane of existence), is supposed
to be a seething pleasure ground (base and gross in comparison to the higher heavenly realm)
meant for gratification and indulgence, Ashlesha often displays an unquenchable thirst for gnUftcation
on the earthly plane of existence as well.
Notuo U functioning :
The English words which use Ashlesha's alphabets ("Da", "Di", "Do") - "Demon", "Diabolical",
"Darkness", "Debauchery", "Devouring", "Danger", "Deceit", "Deception", "Dastardly", "Dagger",
"Decadence", "Degenerate", "Delinquent", "Destitute", "Defile", "Destruction", "Depression",
"Damned", "Death", "Delusion", "Desperation", "Despotic", "Doom", "Devious", "Doctor" - sum up
Ashlesha's nature and functioning. Much needn't be said after a thought is paid to each of these
lerms. Obviously this doesn't paint Ashlesha in a good light, but it is very hard for Ashlesha to
function in a wholesome and healthy way when acting on a mundane level.
Ashlesha is perhaps the most difficult of all nakshatra energies to handle and channel correctly,
especially in the present day and age. Even the ancient sages and scholars had very few kind words

[page 138]
140
to say in relation to this nakshatra. It has its occult and esoteric significance, which the reader can
look up in the Esoteric Section of this chapter.
Ashlesha rising gives a squarish face; parallel, straight, wide, thin lips; beady small eyes; a
naturally suspicious look and a pale complexion. Despite lacking facial attractiveness, natives born
under this nakshatra generally have sexually appealing bodies. Their movements are similar to that
of snakes, They are very conscious of how they move and how their movement arouses sexual
passion in others.
They are adept at putting up socially acceptable and amiable fronts. They use couftesy as a tool
to flatter others. This good humour doesn't last for long, for once their objective is achieved, they
are immediately cold and ruthless. They are always scheming and plotting when it comes to climbing
the social ladder. Since they often work from very superficial levels, their chameleon like quality and
deception is very evident to anyone having an above-average level of perceptiveness. The Ashlesha
element in a personality can be easily spotted through the almost constant suspicion and mistrust
prevalent in the background. Worry and caution follow them relentlessly.
On a positive level, their suspicious natures make them good observers. This power of obseruation
is often combined with a natural intuition. However Ashlesha's intuitive and psychic capabilities tend
to function.best in situations where an element of danger is there. Natives can sense danger quickly
and react quickly, On a negative level, their suspicion can turn into paranoia. In its extreme state,
paranoia can become an illnesss. Paranoid schizophrenia is a disease whose roots lie in Ashlesha.
Ashlesha natives can aid others in psychological exploration and understanding, but they also have
a tendency to use their psychological perceptiveness to exploit others.
It is the predominance of Ashlesha energy which makes society a cradle of fear and suspicion.
Ashlesha is about "lock your doors and mistrust your neighbour." It is due to this inherent mistrust
that Ashlesha natives tend to remain hidden in regards to their true thoughts and feelings. They do
not form intimate bonds with others and will mistrust their most closest confidantes and families.
They are however highly protective towards their kith and kin and will ward off suspicious intruders
in the most ruthless manner.

[page 139]
t41
Ashlesha natives can be the most mean and stingy in regards to financial affairs. Their miserliness
never pays in the end as they always end up having losses one way or the other. The presence of
Ashlesha in a nativity works both ways; one deceives others and gets deceived by others. Many
Ashlesha natives are victims, rather than the users, especially natives who have planets like Sun and
Jupiter placed in Ashlesha.
Ashlesha is a glutton and shows great interest in food, especially when it is not Sattwic and
prepared by others' Ashlesha natives find themselves at home in hotels, bars, restaurants and the
like' They usually cannot bear any kind of hunger. They are the hoarders of the zodiac and dislike
throwing anything away. They can go to real extremes in this regard and need to learn to put the
material world into its proper perspective. They have a natural affinity for poisons. They do not mind
drugs, pharmaceuticals, allopathy, doctors, antibiotics etc.
Ashlesha natives enjoy business activities which border on crookery. They never employ straight
methods in business and want some type of cheating or deception to be involved. They find humour
in tricking others. They like mental games and strategy. They delight in hoodwinking others.
If one think of the characteristics of cats and snakes it is not difficult to sum upan Ashlesha
personality. Cunningness, calculativeness, caution, coldbloodedness, wiliness, stealth are common
traits amongst cats and snakes. The only way Ashlesha natives cin use their singularly negative
traits in a positive manner is by aligning themselves with universal will. The key for utilizing Ashlesha
in a positive way is to overcome one's innate selfishness. Having done that, suspicion will tum into
discretion and wiliness into wisdom. Ashlesha is the first step on the path of spiritual awakening.
The underbelly of nature is encountered here. One has to face all the dark demons of the inner
psyche in order to come out shining and purified. Ashlesha's nafural tendency to look under the
surface has to be utilized for understanding the hidden elements of nature's functionings.
In the universal scheme of things, Ashlesha relates to "uisasleshana shakti" - the power to
inflict poison. Its symbolism has an approaching serpent above and trembling below. This relates
Ashlesha with all kinds of sharp, venomous attacks made at one's enemy or prey. Once again the
dangerous and naturally malefic potentiality of this nakshatra come to light. :t:;

[page 140]
142
Modc of functioning :
Ashlesha is considered to be an Active nakshatra. Ashlesha on the sudace often appears to be
a passive nakshatra but that is only because all its activities are hidden. Even if an Ashlesha native
seems to be physically passive, one will find that they are weaving many webs on the mental plane.
Ashlesha's activities are subterranean in all senses of the world. In the present day and age where all
the workings.of the elite take place in secret away from the eyes of the public, one cannot help but
seb a dominant role of Ashlesha in the halls of power.
Caste :
It belongs to the lowest caste which is called Mleccha (outcaste). In its lower functionings
Ashlesha is a soft of general menace to society in allthe known forms like bandits, cheats, oppressors,
exploiters etc. In its higher functioning it relates to the yogi who renounces the world in the search
for enlightenment. In both ways Ashlesha doesn't seem to fit into the societal civilized structure.
Qen{er :
It is a Female nakshatra. Since the ancient Vedic seers have made this classification without
enunciatihg a reason, we have to conclude that the intuitive, perceptive and deceptive qualities
ascribed to Ashlesha relate more to the female of the species rather than the male. One can notice
that even male natives under the prominent influence of Ashlesha have a feminine way about them'
tsodyports d %wwr (Ayurve{b Corstitution) :
Bone Joints like Elbows, Knuckles, Knee C-aps; the Nails and the Ears are the body parts related
to this nakshatra.
)
It is a primarily "Kapha" (watery) nakshatra. This is due to its relationship with the sign Cancer.
fvlost serpent deities are shown as having kapha characteristics like stagnation, laziness, indulgence
etc

[page 141]
| ltit
Direction :
It is related to the directional range which covers the nofthwest to the nortr. Like all serpent
energies it is strong in the Southwest as well.
ea{as (@nrters) :
The first pada or quafter of this asterism 16" 40' - 20" 00' Cancer falls in Sagittarius Navamsa
and is ruled by Jupiter. This pada has the ability to put in the most hard work. It has a lot to do with
dealing with enmity, diseases and other 6th house affairs.
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 20o 00' - 23o z|'Cancer falls in Capricom Navamsa
ruled by Saturn. This pada is mostly involved in dealing with people. It is a highly ambitious pada
which is usually liable to use all of Ashlesha's negative traits like trickery and deceit to get what it
wants. An inability to let go of possessions is another unique aspect of this pada. Being a Ganda Mula
pada, this pada is considered bad for finances.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 23o 20' - 260 40' Cancer falls in Aquarius Navamsa
ruled by Saturn. Secrecy is the keyword to this pada. It however is most closely related to the occult
side of Ashlesha, discussed in the Esoteric Section. This pada usually goes to unusual lengths and
takes highly inventive approaches to scheming and plotting. Planets placed here adversely effects
mother's wellbeing.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 260 40' - 30" 00' Cancer falls in Pisces Navamsa
rubd 6y Jupiter. This is the pada relating to all kinds of illusions. The moral struggle is at its peak
here. This is the place where the "serpent of Ashlesha" finally gets slain, and people under the
strong influence of this pada, are more likely to get tricked by others, rather than deceive others.
Such natives are always putting up fronts and hardly ever show their true nature. Planets placed
here adversely effect the fatherb wellbeing.

[page 142]
144
Qrofessions :
All professions dealing with Poisons; Petroleum Industry; Chemical Engineers; Cigarette Industry;
Legal and Illegal Drug Dealers; Drug Pushers; All Self Serving professions like present day Politicians;
Behind the Scenes Manipulators; Psychologists; Con Artists; Thieves; Swindlers; Pornography Industry;
Prostitutes; Snake Charmers; Professions involving dealing with Reptiles; Allopathic Doctors &
Surgeons; Pet Snake & Pet Cat Owners; Poachers; Secret Service Agents; Spies; Lawyers;
Pawnbrokers; Physical Yoga Teachers; Tantrics (usually beginner types); Hypnotists; Psychologists/
Psychiatrists; Spirit Mediums; Charlatan Channelists/Psychics etc; False Gurus and Cult Leaders;
Baseball Players.
Q{acu :
All places where Snakes & Reptiles dwell; Secret seryice Institituions (CIA, FBI etc, ); Hospitals;
Law Firms; All Factories dealing with Poisonous Chemical Processes; Drug Stores; Pawn Shops;
Sleazy Places where Illegal Prostitution & Drug Peddling thrive; False Cults & Religious Institutions
like ISKON etc. ; all places connected with the above professions.
]ur* (Essence) and Tattula (Ekment) :
It is supposed to be a Sattwic nakshatra. This classification might perplex the reader but the
intention of the ancient seers can be understood thus - Ashlesha relates directly to the kundalini
shakti (see the Esoteric section), which encodes all of our life, all of our previous lives'experiences.
She (kundalini shaKi) is our mother and our individual blueprint and so cannot be regarded as
anything but purely sattvic.
It belongs to the Water element. There's not mLrch to explain here as this classification is in
keeping with its predominant kapha humor.

[page 143]
145
Qana (typr) :
' It is considered a Rakhas or demonic nakshatra. This comes as no surprise as Hydra, Ashlesha's
representative constellation in the sky, is said to be the abode of the most dangerous celestial
demonic creatures. Ashlesha as we have seen already can be quite cruel and wicked and very rarely
functions from an unselfish perspective. , I
Orientation ond Dbposition :
It is Downward nakhatra. It is common knowledge that snakes don't live above the ground.
Ashlesha stands for and is interested in all things underground both literally and figuratively. Planets
placed in Ashlesha often feel contained or constrained and often have to work in a behind-the-
scenes fashion.
It is a Hard, Sharp and Dreadful nakshatra. This comes as no surprise considering the immensity
of its negative potential. The reader can refer to the Nature Section of this nakshatra for the nitty
gritty of it.
Lunar Montfi U Day :
It relates to the first half of the lunar month of Magha, a period which usually falls in the month
of January in the solar (Gregorian) calendar.
Ashlesha is also relatedto Nauami ( 9th tithior day) of the waxing and waning phases of the
Moon's monthly cycle.
Auspitious Actiaitits :
All types of activities requiring harsh measures like Administering Poisons, Filing of Lawsuits
etc; Good for Scheming & Plotting against One's Enemies; Good for Sexual Activity; Good for all Low
Risk Short term activities; Good for Kundalini Yoga .

[page 144]
146
I nauspicious Actiaitics
Generally unfavouraHe for all types of Beginnings & Auspicious Activities; This is a good time to
lie low; Especially unfavourable for doing business; Bad for Borrowing or Lending money.
lPfanctary fotfcr :
Moon and Mercury are the two planets connected with this nakshatra, Mercury being the main
planetary ruler. Mostly the negative Mercurial traits like evasiveness, deception and deviousness get
highlighted in this nakshatra. Ashlesha uses Mercury's alacrity, perceptiveness and calculating ability,
more often than not, to fufther its own selfish ends. This is obviously the case in the present day and
age, but the actual functioning of Mercury here is to control the mind (represented by the lvloon).
Ashlesha is supposed to be the place where intellect develops itself to control and direct the
vast subconscious and instinctual workings of the mind. In today's world, Mercury's ability to direct
Moon is used for deceiving the masses (Moon) through the media (Mercury). This negative usage of
Mercurial energy makes this one of the most dangerous nakshatras in Kali-Yuga (present age/cycle
of humanity). This is especially evident when seen in light of the fact that Mercury is representative
of one of the preserving forces in nature. As a result society/civilization and the natural world are
thrown comfletely out of balance. Ashlesha is the battleground where the war between intellect and
emotions, conscious and subconscious, reasonability and primevality takes place. Its turbulent energies
rnake it very suscepUble to decadence and taking the wrong path.
Moon/Mercury conjunction in a horoscope give simibr results to Ashlesha. Ketu is supposed to
give good results in Ashlesha when aspected by Jupiter. No other planet can be said to function well
in this nakshatra. A well placed Mercury however, can make the native a shrewd and manipulative
businessman.

[page 145]
147
Uouek anl A[pfiabe* :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 160 40' -20o 00' Cancer corresponds to "Dee" as in
Deena.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 20o 00' - 23" 20' Cancer corresponds to "Doo" as
in Dupont or Dude .
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 23o 20' - 26o 40' Cancer corresponds to "Day" as in
David.
The fourth pada or quarter ofthis asterism 26o 40' - 30o 00'Cancer corresponds to "Doh" as in
Dorothy or Doctor.
In the Sanskrit alphabet Ashlesha corresponds to "Kha" and"Ga", consequently its mantras are
"Om Kham" and "Om Gam",
Seryta[ type and Compatifii[ity :
Its sexual animal is a Cat. Cats are quite intensely sexual animals. One can easily see that even
basic keywords for Ashlesha like entwining, clinging, embracing and coiling relate to sexual union. In
the present day and age this nakshatra can be said to be responsible for most of the sexual exploitaUon.
Aside from its own nakshatra it is most sexually compatible with Purnavasu.
For sexual & marital compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the tables on pages 457
& 458.
'Esoteri"c. :
We have already noticed the connection between Ashlesha and Hydra, the most feared serpent
in the night sky. In Greek legends Hydra is supposed to be this many headed serpent which was
finally subdued by Hercules. It is interesting to note that the royal nakshatra of Magha (see next

[page 146]
148
chapter) lies right next to this serpent constellation. Ancient legends are trying to tell us that the
crown and authority (represented by Magha) is only achieved after the dark serpent (vices and
undesirable qualities) is subdued within each one of us. The lower nature has to be won over before
we can tune. into our higher nature. Ashlesha is therefore a crucial focal point for the battle between
good and bad, It is the last among the first cycle of nakhatras (a new cycle begins in Magha).
Ashlesha relates directly to the kundalini. Kundalini is a serpent shaped, two and a half coils of
astral/causal energy, which lies in the Muladhara Chakra (sacral root centre) at the base of our
spines. It is the function of Ashlesha to arouse and activate this energy. Most of Ashlesha's field and
scope of activity lies within the instjnctual, primordial domain of the root centre.
The arousal of the kundalini is the first step on the way to enlightenment. This again re-
emphasizes the point that Ashlesha is a point where a conscious choice is made. This choice of
coursie relates to letting go of our baser, gross materialistic nature so that we can begin our journey
on the path of wisdom and enlightenment. The journey of the kundalini, which begins in Ashlesha,
cufminates in Uttarabhadrapada (see Chapter 26.)
Qotra (Cekstiat Liruage) :
This ndkshatra is related to the Sage Vashishta,one of the seven celestial sages looking after
the affairs of our galaxy. The name of this sage translates into "possessor of wealth". According to
Vedic texts most of serpent deities are said to guard treasure. According to ancient Vedic mytholoe';
most of the celestial serpent deities are shown as being enormously wealthy. Thus it is appropriate
that the sage who has most to do with wealth presides over this nakshatra.
funnedi"al :
Paying reverance or obeisance to serpents or doing serpent rituals like hrpa Homais useful for
gaining the favour of the energies of this nakhatra. In India, a special day known as Narga Panchami

[page 147]
149
is reserved for feeding milk to snakes and worshipping serpent deities. Practicing kundalini yoga
(also known as Raja yoga) is the best way of rising above the negative qualities of this nakshatra.
Repetition of the root mantras of this nakshatra - "Om Kham" and "Om Gam" 108 times when
Moon transits this nakshatra and during the lunar month of this nakshatra is sure to reduce suffering
and bring enlightenment into a percAnt life,
Persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this nakshatra can also increase the
good effects through the above mentioned ways. Ashlesha natives are usually attracted to dark
shades of every colour. They are often seen wearing red and black. However they are advised to
wear more sattvic shades even when they are using variegated colours. They should avoid gaudy
shades.
E4ampk:
Indira Gandhi, the first and only woman prime minister of India, was born with Ashlesha rising
on her Ascendant. Her extremely manipulative and deceptive nature is now common knowledge,
especially in India. Her life and works reveal all of Ashlesha's functionings in modern times. Greed,
deceit, tragedy, treachery betrayal, false gurus, false propaganda - she had it all!
Mahatma Gandhiwas born with Moon in Ashlesha. Even though he was a deceptive type with
not cqmpletely wholesome motives, he was able to fool the public, who raised him to Sainthood.
Mkceffaneous :
According to Varahamihira, those born with Moon in Ashlesha are false, wicked, ungrateful,
crafty and gluttonous, eating everything in sight.
***

[page 148]
#-l
J ,J
,:'%. {&
f O. $agha ooO' - l)'7o'leo

[page 149]
10.
tutryfro
(0000' Leo - 13020' Leo)
In tfie SkU t
Magha, the brightest and largest amongst nakshatras, is represented in the night sky by a
sickle-shaped group of stars in front of the royal constellation of Leo. The brightest among these is
Regulus or Alpha-Leonts. With a visual magnitude of 1.41, it is one of the brightest stars in the night
sky and is also known as the "Little King" or the "Little Sun". Its companions, which comprise the
rest of the constellation, lie above it and are known in modern astronomy as EE-Lnnis (Al Jabhah),
Zeb-Leonis (Adhafera), Mu-Lanis (Raalas), Epsilon-Leonis, Lambda-Leonis (Alterf)& lGppa-Lonis.
Ancient Vedic seers saw this constellation as a throne while other cultures saw it as a lion.
Magha translates into "mighty", "the beneficent", "the great", "the magnificent", "the most
impoftant" or "the bountiful". This translation immediately evokes a variety of meanings and feelings
and as we shall see this nakshatra is true to its name.
Sym6o[ :
Magha's main symbol is a 'throne'. As a matter of detail one ctrn say it is a 'royal chamber with
a throne'(please refer to the image). This symbolism immediately conjures up a picture of royalty,
power, status, honour and the like. We can see that all these interpretations live up to the meanings
A[ame :

[page 150]
154
evoked by the name of this nakshatra, However the bottom line of this symbolism lies in one word -
"achievement". After the struggles and tribulations of Ashlesha(previous nakshatra), it is now time
for reaping rewards. In the material realm, Magha bestows this reward on natives under its influence
through power, position, authority; and in the higher aspect, through self knowledge.
In a way the body is nothing but the throne of the soul. Most of us identiff or attach our sense
of self to our minds and bodies. Magha is the first nakshatra which relates to the individualization
process. It represents all that we mean when we say "I". The soul uses the body and mind as its
identity. The mind and intellect however are given the task to understand our true identities as
eternal, everlasting souls. There's no greater accomplishment with the discovery of the "self". In its
material aspect, Magha can bestow all kinds of worldly honours and prestige, usually through our
ability to accomplish on the material plane.
In many cases Magha can bestow all of this as a result purely through hereditary means or
some soft of succession. In ancient times it was implicit that the son of the king will be king and the
son of a barber will be a barber. Even though things appear different today, they are still pretty mudt
the same if one looks at the full picture.
Magha's throne denotes all that we have inherited, whether it be genes, roots, propefi, wealth,
knowledge'or status through our parents and ancestors. Magha is therefore the nakshatra which is
most closely related to our sense of identity. It relates to who we are and where we are coming from.
. Deitg :
Pitris, or "the ancestorsn, are the main ruling deity of this asterism. It comes as no surprise that
the world of the ancestors controls Magha. As we discussed earlier, we owe alot to our ancestors in
terms of our actual self identity and station in life, even without ever knowing or acknowledging it,
as is the case in modern times. Ancestor worship was another one of the common strands which
connected all ancient civilizations.

[page 151]
155
Our ancient ancestors obviously were not ungrateful fools like us and saw it as their duty and
privilege to keep alive the knowledge of their roots, by honouring and in some cases bonding with
their ancestors in the other realms. In the rural areas of countries like [ndia, ancestor worship still
remains a serious matter. In fact death rites usually involve rituals directly related to one's ancestry.
Many families in India, especially Brahmin families, often trace their ancestries back to the original
seven sages whp were created by Brahma, at the very beginning of creation.
The modern science of genetics has made it clear that most of our abilities and capabilities are
dependant upon our genetic code and that this genetic code is basically a sort of free gift from our
ancestors. In the same way, Magha is known for bestowing liberal favours without any expectation
of return. It is basically a nakshatra which deals with the past. We should however keep in mind that
our ancestors are not frozen remains of the past, but are actually alive in one of the universal
realms.
The Puranic te:rts tell us that there is a a heavenly realm called Pitra Loka or "world of the
ancestors". This is the world where alot among us go to after our physical deaths. It is sott of an
intermediary station where souls meet their ancestors and rest for awhile, before returning to earth
for another life or moving on to other lokas. This world of the ancestors finds vivid descriptions in all
ancient cultures, especially among the present day native American Indian and aboriginal tribes.
This world of the dead is supposed to overlook our affairs on the physical earthly realm and in some
cases, some direct intervention and communication is experienced. Magha is a nakshatra relating
both to our identity in the present life and our after death journey.
Afature U functbning :
Common english words like "magnificent", "manor", "major", "mayor", "master"r "magic" and
"magnanimous" seem to have their root in the first two syllables of the word "Magha". The meanings
of these words relate to Magha's functioning at some level or the other.

[page 152]
156
It is Magha's job to shape the present using the past. Wherever this nakshatra is placed in a
chart one will experience the positive effects of one's past karmas. This may manifest as opportunities
or favour from those in high positiors. These favours are very sudden and based on impulse from
those who bestow them..
Its fierceness corresponds to the fierce aspect of Ketu, which is akin to the fierce aspect of Sun.
Ketu is the most fierce among planets. It can be as fierce as the mid-summer, mid-afternoon desert
Sun. Fierceness as we know is also associated with authority at some level. Authority can either
foster magnanimity or produce the merciless tyrants who are blinded by power and authority.
It is a human asterism which brings out the more worldly human side of esoterically oriented
Ketu. This is very much a worldly nakshatra which is interested in human affairs. Ketu is known to us
as a separative planet which disassociates one from worldly ties, but through this asterism it promotes
involvement in mundane affairs for discharging one's worldly duties. It brings out the materially
active side of Ketu which is very concerned about social status, prominence and discharging of one's
worldly duties. This is why its pitfall lies in making one over ambitious in one's material pursuits.
However when working through its higher principal, this asterism has a high degree of idealism even
when surrounded by worldly attainments. Ketu is an idealistic planet when functioning in its solar
aspect. Ketu is also a naturally rebellious planet and consequently this nakshatra is directly related to
all types of revolts against authority.
This is an asterism connected to the sustenance and maintenance aspect of nature. Its primary
impulse is to maintain established traditions, organizations and civilizaUons. This is usually the function
of those in positions of authority whom this asterism represents.
Natives with Magha rising or strong Magha influence are easy to spot because of their big noses
and regal demeanour. Magha people have middle stature and lion{ike top heavy bodies. They have
arrogant mannerisms which make them misunderstood in general. Their power lies in covering up
weaknesses through reservedness. They usually align their selves with their ancestral lineage and
derive pride through a sense of belonging. They are usually magnanimous to those below their

[page 153]
157
station in life. Following a moral and ethical code is impoftant for their inner peace of mind. Magha
natives usually have a strong concern for the continuation of their fami[ lineage through progeny.
They have great expectations of their progeny and want them to brlng pride and renown to the
family.
In the universal scheme of things, Magha relates to "tyaga shepani shakti" - the power of the
astral body to cut its ties with the physical body. Its symbolism has mourning above and the death
process below. This relates Magha to all endings like physical death and new beginnings which arise
as a result. Magha guides the souls to Pitra Loka (the realm of the ancestors) after one's death. Thus
Magha is basically a facilitator in change of state,
Moda of furrctionlnq :
Magha is considered to be an Active nakshatra. Magha's naturally fiery nature promotes activity
and dynamism. It is Magha's striving for a sense of achievement and glory which makes it pursue an
active way of life.
Caste i
Strangely enough, the ancient Vedic seers assigned the royal nakhatra of Magha the Shudra
(servant) caste. Their line of thinking may be partially understood when one comes to the
understanding that finally a king is nothing but a seruant of his people. It is Magha's duty to be of
seruice no matter what high throne it sits upon. This is best conveyed in the words of the contemporary
Wet tub Dylan, "You might be the devil or you might be the lord, but you gotta serve somebody!"
Qendcr :
It is a Female nakshatra, It has been a tradition in the Vedic literature to view things like
prosperity, fame and fortune as feminine. All these desired attainments in the material world are

[page 154]
158
often depicted in the form of goddesses. It is interesting to note that even the word 'vanity'is seen
as a predominantly feminine vice.
Bodyparts (r 5{umar (Ayurvefic Constitutinn) :
Nose, Lips and Chin are the body pafts related to this nakhatra. Readers thus can notice that
people with prominent Magha influence in their charts usually hav_e a big nose. It is not very difficult
to see where the term "high nosed" came from!
It is a primarily "Kapha" (watery) nakshatra. It can be noticed that Magha has the ability to hide
its ambitions, motives and fieriness under a calm exterior. A calm exterior as we know is often
associated with water signs or the kapha element.
Directbn :
It is related primarily to east, south, northwest and southwest.
. Padas (Qyorters) :
The first pada or quafter of this asterism 00o 00' - 3o 20' Leo, falls in Aries Navamsa and is
ruled by Mars. This is the pada relating to the will power aspect of Magha. This is the pada where the
throne is won after the killing of the many headed serpent of Ashlesha. Magha qualities like self
asseftion, leadership, courage and idealism are displayed here to their fullest.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 30 20' - 6" 40' Leo, falls in Taurus Navamsa ruled
by Venus. After the throning, the king has to consolidate his position. This is a very ambitious pada,
where the emphasis is on image, duty and materialistic organization, Planets placed here bring
about favours from superiors.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 6o 40' - 10o 00' Leo, falls in Gemini Navamsa ruled by
Mercury. This pada relates to the often ignored intellectual side of Magha. After the throne is safe,

[page 155]
159
the king indulges in more literary artistic pursuits and listens to discourses from learned men. The
emphasis here is on mental activity and a quest for knowledge (knowledge of the ancients in the
present times!). Planets placed here make one succeed through group activity, even though it is
Magha's essential nature to go it alone.
The foutth pada or quarter of this asterism 10o (X)' - 13o 20' Leo, falls in Cancer Navamsa ruled
by Moon. This is the pada which brings out Magha's love of ritual, ceremonies, ancestor worship and
family pride. The king here concentrates on the wellbeing of his subjects, his family life and looks for
progeny to keep his lineage going. Planets placed in this pada make one derive pride from one's
family, ancestors and one's charitability. Planets here are not very conducive to material prosperity
and create upheavals through some form of self undoing.
grofessiotu :
Administrators; Managers; Royalty and those in direct touch with Royalty; Those who bestow
(or receive) honours like "knighthood" etc. ; Those in high places in Government; People at the top
of their chosen professions; Legends; Bureaucrats; Aristocrats; Officials; Chairmen (those in a position
of authority); Lawyers; Advocates; Judges, Referees, Magistrates and the like; Politicians; Historians;
Librarians; Orators; Dramatists & Pedormers; Upholders of Traditions; Professions relating to Museums
of all types; Occultists; Black Magicians; Exorcists; Astrologers; Dealers in Antiques of all types;
Archaeologists; Genetic Engineering Experts; Professions related to using and researching Ancient
Knowledge, Monuments etc; Those Researching & Documenting Lineages.
lPfacu
Desefts; Forests; Capital Cities; Libraries; Museums; Palaces; Ancient Monuments & Sites;
Govt. Offices; Residences of Top Politicians; National Monuments; Stages & Pedormance Halls;
Ceremonial Grounds & Buildings; Crematories; Places of Religious, Spiritual Significance.

[page 156]
160
Quna (Tssence) and Tattwa (Efament)
It is supposed to be a Tamasic nakshatra. The primary reason why the ancient seers saw the
active Magha as being predominated by tamasic energy is because of the fact that it relates more to
the past. Many a times Magha can retard new growth as a result of being stuck in the past. Magha
carries within itself all the inertia, temptations and trappings that the past more often than not
manages to cbnjure.
It belongs to the Water element. It is a watery nakshatra in the sense that it is like an ocean and
represents the expansive watery side of Ketu. Ocean is again symbolic of vastness and prominence
inherent in this nakshatra. Water as we know is the secondary element of Ketu. It brings out the
emotional side of Ketu, which manifests in qualities like compassion and benevolence. These are
important qualities for those in positions of authority .
Qana EWd :
It is considered a Rakshasa (demonic) nakshatra. Through this classification the ancient seers
are giving us a signal that the world of the ancestors is not all benign and godly. There are many
bhootas, pretas, pishachasand other types of negative astral entities associated with this nakshatra.
Most of thd black magic practices involve the summoning and use of these negative entities. Most of
these dark occult practices are often done in order to gain typical Magha goals - power, status, fame,
fortune, prosperity etc. A statement of caution for the black magic practitioners - "every action has
a reaction and everything has its price". t
Orientatbn and Disposition :
It is a Downward Looking nakshatra. This basically relates to Magha's association with the past
and in the same sense, all things down and under. As mentioned earlier, Magha can be quite a
constrictive influence, a role which the bureaucracy and authority plays to the'T' in the present

[page 157]
161
times. It is interesting to note that alot of research relating to the past involves digging underground,
an activity normally associated with downward nakshatras
It is an Ugra(fierce or aggressive) nakshatra. It is very clear that no throne is attained without
overcoming numerous obstacles, enemies and the like. It is Magha's burning pride and ambition that
makes it fierce and cruel. Magha sets itself no limits or boundaries when it comes to achieving its
goals.
Lunar Month a Daa :
It is related to the second half of the lunar month of Magha. This period usually falls in the
month of February in the solar calendar. In India this paft of the month of Magha is still used for
ancestor worship.
Magha is also relatedto Amauasya (15d1 tithi or New Moon Day) of the waning phase of the
Moon's monthly cycle.
Arupitious Actirtities :
Ceremoriies of all kinds, especially those requiring pomp and grandeur; Marriage ceremonies;
Stage & public performances whether it involves music, oratory or drama; Public displays; Coronations
and other royal events; Parades; Award ceremonies; Researching one's lineage; Anything involving
the pasU Historical/classical studies & research; Taking on a new name; Upgrading to higher and
better quality in possessions, jobs, etc. ; Undertaking career strategies; Job promotions; Donating
elaborate gifts; Studying ancient knowledge; Religious activities of all types especially those involving
ancestor worship; Good for settling disputes or other warlike activities; A good time to seek favours
from powerful persons, government and other authority figures.

[page 158]
162
hnrupbinw Actiaitits :
Not favourable for lending money; Not good for servile, mundane or common activities; Not
good for futuristic planning and exploration; Not very conducive for dealing with new technologies.
9fanetary \ubr :
Ketu is the main planetary ruler of Magha. One of Ketu's main symbols is a Flag, which directly
relates to authority, eminence, fame etc. This favoured position in the present life is earnt due to
meritorious past life deeds. Ketu as we know is the guardian of our past karmas and it releases the
ones that are ripe enough to be experienced in the present life through this nakshatra.
The qualities and attributes of Ketu like deep perception, penetrating insight and independent
spirit which are similar to that of Sun, are exhibited by Magha. Sun as we know is the royal planet
but mosdy we don't see Ketu in that light. This asterism brings out the regal side of Ketu. This
asterism can be seen as a combination of Sun's and Ketu's energies. Sun is related to Magha as a
result of being the ruler of Leo, the sign Magha falls in.
Ketu as we have discussed earlier, is a genetic planet and represents the paternal grandfather
and maternal grandmother in a chart. Our connection with our ancestors has a lot to do with our
past lives which is again a Ketu domain. To sum it up, Magha has a lot to do with the genetic and
past heritage aspect of Ketu. It also relates to the fact that Ketu is responsible for bringing the
wisdom of the ancient ages and civilizations to the present.
Sun-Ketu conjunction in a nativity carries an energy similar to that of Magha. Fiery royal planets
like Sun & Mars usually do well in Magha. Seruant planets like Saturn however feel at sea in this
nakshatra.

[page 159]
163
'I/outek an[ Atpfiabe* :
The first pada or quafter of this asterism 00" 00' - 3" 20' Leo corresponds to "Ma" as in Magic
or Marilyn.
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 30 20' - 6o 40' Leo corresponds to "Mi" as in Mia.
The third pada or quafter of this asterism 6o 40' - 10o 00' Leo corresponds to "Mu" as in Mt*ti.
The fourth pada or quafter of this asterism 10o 00' - 13o 20' Leo corresponds to "Me" as in
Meryl.
In the Sanskrit alphabet Magha corresponds to "Gha" and "Nga", consequently its mantras are
"Om Gham" and "Om Ngam".
Seretat'lype and Compati|i[ity :
Its sexual animal is a Rat. It is interesting to note that the regal and pompous Magha becomes
a rat in bed. Magha is always said to have a weakness for the opposite sex. Rats are highly sexually
active animals known to produce scores of progeny. As we have discussed, Magha is very fixed on
propagating its lineage and its rampant sexuality is both for procreation and recreation. It could be
said that sexuality is just another show off medium for Magha, who in reality often doesn't match up
to its paftner3 expectations in bed. It is mostly compatible with its fellow rat Purua Phalguni.
For sexual and marital compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the tables on pages
457 & 458 .
'Esoterb :
Magha is the 10h nakshatra and thus like the 10b house its spirituality lies in l6rma Yoga,
which entails fulfilling one's duty in life. The *ar Rqulus, the principle star of Magha, was revered
in all the ancient cultures as the celestial seat of power. The constellation of Magha lay beside Hydra,

[page 160]
164
the constellation relating to the demonic serpent forces and the previous nakshatra Ashlesha. This
relates to the fact that the crown or throne of Magha is only achieved after overcoming the primordial
negaUve part of our nature exemplified by Asfrlestra.
In the Greek culture (an offshoot of the ancient Vedic culture), there are references to many
celestial battles between the serpents and the Gods. The most famous of these battles relates to the
kilf ing of Hydrd, the sea serpent with nine heads, by Hercules, the son of Jupiter. Hydra is the longest
constellation in the sky and also covers the largest area. The astrological signs of Cancer, Leo, Virgo
and Libra can be seen placed along its northern side. Hercules, the great warrior, is also a constellation
in the sky placed close to the star Vega.
Krishna, an incarnation of Vishnu, kills a several-headed serpent calld Kaliya in a story very
reminiscent of the above-mentioned Greek legend. It was understood that subduing or winning over
these forces was an impoftant part of establishing oneself as being worthy of the throne, which
allowed one to have influence over the masses. The whole point of Magha is to rise above the
Cancerian pool of mass-mentality and discover one's own unique individuality.
The fact that our ancient ancestors who lived in the Golden, Silver & Bronze ages were suppposed
to be more highly evolved than us, makes the world of the ancestors a place where we could draw
wisdom and knowledge from. Ancient native cultures like the Native American Indians and the
Nordics have always known this fact. Any real change in the present day situation of hopelessness,
confusion and misery will only come about after the knowledge of the ancients is properly understood.
Q otra (Cetrs tiat Lineag e)
This nakshatra is related to the Sage Angiras, one of the seven celestial sages looking after the
affairs of our galaxy. The name of this sage translates into "the fiery one". Considering Magha's
essential fiery nature, it is no wonder that it connects to this particular sage, whq as we recall, also
presides over the fiery nakshatra of Krittika.

[page 161]
165
fu:medinl :
One straightforward way of getting Magha on your side is to be respectful and reverential
towards elders and ancestors. Peforman ce of a Shradhaceremony for one's ancestors in the prescribed
tithi of the lunar month of Magha, is auspicious in the sense that one receives blessings from the
worfd of the ancestors. Worship of tGli or Shiva is the best way of mastering the energy of this
nakshatra.
Repetition of the root mantra of this nakshatra - "Om Gham" and "Om Ngam" 108 times when
Moon transits this nakshatra and in the the lunar montt of Magha is sure to reduce suffering and
bring enlightenment into a person's life.
Persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this nakshatra can also increase the
good effects through the above mentioned ways. It is helpful for them to wear royal colours which
includes dark and bright shades of gold, reds and yellows. They should use its directions, lunar
month and the days when Moon transits Magha to undeftake all impoftant actions.
Eag.mpfe:
Paramahamsa Yogananda, one of the famous spiritual teachers who popularizd kundalini yoga
t
in the west, has his Moon and Ascendant placed in Magha. His life and works as recollected in his
book, 'Autobiography of a Yogi", reveal alot relating to the lineage oriented functioning of Magha.
Both his spiritual authority and his spiritual teaching were a legacy from a line of Ascended Masters
like Yukteshwara, Lahira Mahashaya and the mysterious figure of Eabaji.
Miscet[aneow :
According to Varahamihira, those born with Moon in Magha have "lots of wealth, many servants,
live a life of luxury and enjoyment, are persevering and devoted to gods and ancestors". All of these
indications apply to our example.
***

[page 162]
| |. furvaphalguni lf}ot -26"1Q'Leo

[page 163]
11.
In tfu Sky t
Puruaphalguni is represented in the night sky by two bright stars in the back of the constellation
of Leo. These stars can be seen forming a paft of the lion shape usually associated with the constellation
Leo. However ancient Vedic seers saw these two stars as representing the back legs of a cot (or the
two poles of a swinging hammock). These stars are known in modern astronomy as Delta-Leonis
(Zosma) & Theta-Leonis (Chertan). With a visual magnitude of 2.56, Zosma is the brighter one
among them. It is very easy to locate these stars in the night sky as Leo is the brightest among the
twelve zodiacal constellations. These stars are located to the left of the bfight slar Reguluswhere
the hindlegs of the lion figure of Leo are supposed to be, Zosma lies on top of chertan.
9t(rme :
Puruaphalguni translates into the "former reddish one", "the former" or "little fig tree". The
colour red always evokes a wide variety of meanings and feelings and as we shall see, this nakshatra
has a lot to do with the nature, qualities and temperament generally associated with the colour red.
The "fig tree" translation b a more obscure one and relates to the procreative aspect of this asterism.
fu.rvopfi,funi
(13020'Leo - 26040' Leo)

[page 164]
170
Syrnfiot :
Its main symbol is the front legs of a couch or bed. The bed referred to here is not the bed we
use for sleeping on during the night time, but a divan or bed/couch used for a daytime siesta or
lounging around. Some astrologers also use a swinging hammock as one of Purvaphalguni's symbols.
It is pretty clear from the above symbols that'comfof is the keyword for this nakshatra. In the cycle
of the 27 nakshatras, the soul looks for comfoft and enjoyment after attaining the 'throne' in the
previous nakshatra.
purvaphalguni relates to a time where we look for rest, relaxation and amusement after fulfilling
our wo4dly duties and responsibilities (activities ruled by the previous nakshatra). The symbolism of
the front legs of a bed/couch relates to the beginning part of this relaxation process. When we are
very tired and hop onto a couch or a bed we usually go into a mode of complete relaxation in the
beginning (the time period varies from individual to individual). Purvaphalguni relates to this beginning
period where we feel like doing no activity and are completely intent upon renewing our energy.
purvaphalguni is thus strongly related with the forces of renewal, which ultimately link it to the
process of creaUon itself.
It is difficult for some of us to understand how something can be creative without being active.
All activity iS dependant upon periods Of non-activity. Nothing or no one can work all the time. It is
the periods of rest which provide the impulse for the creative/active periods' A lot of scientists and
researchers have found that the solution to a problem usually comes to them, not when they are
actually working at the problem, but in the period when they have taken their mind off it and are in
a state of complete relaxation. In the fast paced life of modern times, especially in cities, people
have forgotten the importance of having adequate periods of rest between activities. This is probably
the root cause for most of the physical and psychological traumas faced by the fast paced city
dweller. However one must be careful not to amplifli the Purvaphalguni energy, which usually results
in excessive laziness and indulgence.

[page 165]
171
Deity i
Bhaga, one of the twelve Adityas (nlar deities), is the main ruling deity of this nakshatra. He is
often referred to as the "morning star", which might be a reference to the planet Venus. As we shall
discover later,Venus is the planetary ruler of this nakshatra and was seen in ancient times as a planet
representing the solar aspect of nature. Bhaga's name translates roughly into "delight". A similar
sanskrit word called "bhoga" translates into "pleasure" or "indulgence". The term "Bhagar' finds use
in "bhagavan" (full of delight), one of the sanskrit names often used for gods, incarnations and
evolved souls. In keeping with his name, Bhaga is known for bestowing rest, relaxation, enjoyment,
pleasure, affection, sexual passkrn and rnarital felicity. Thus Puruaphalguni is seen to promote all of
the above indications.
Bhaga's strong relationship with enjoyment and merriment makes this one of the most carefree
nakshatras. Purvaphalguni natives don't like to worry as long as they are comfoftable, especlally
from a physical point of view. Bhaga's obsession with physicality often makes Purvaphalguni natives
oveftly concerned with their bodies. Bhaga's amorous nature gives Purvaphalguni natives a strong
desire to appear beautiful and be appreciated. Bhaga stands for an easy life full of comfort and
luxury and this is what all Puruaphalguni natives aspire for. Bhaga relates to that solar aspect of
nature, which makes life worth living. If one removes the pleasure aspect from the universe, not
many souls wilt Oe willing to take part in the game of life.
Bhaga is always usually invoked along with Aryaman, the ruling deity of Uttaraphalguni, the
following nakshatra. As we shall discover later, these nakshatras form a pair in the same vein as
Mrigashira and Ardn.
Purvaphalguni is directly connected to the Shiva Lingam, the most commonly worshipped form
of Shiua. The fact that Shiva's penis is worshipped more than Shiva as a whole, relates to the penis
being a regenerative symbol, representing creation and continuation of life; while Shiva as a whole
is the god of destruction. Puruaphalguni thus relates to the creative and delightful aspect of Shiva,
which can be easily understood through the stories and legends associated with him. It is interesting

[page 166]
172
to note that the penis is the most delicate paft of male anatomy. This fact brings out the essential
tender quality of PurvaPhalguni.
Abture (r' functionlrg :
After the victory crown and throne achieved through intense battles in Magha, it is natural that
rest, relaxation and enjoyment follow. This is what Purvaphalguni is all about, A period of rest
follows every period of activity, just like a sunny calm follows a storm. Amongst all the nakshatras'
purvaphalguni is the most related to the recreational aspect of nature's functionings. It offers shelter
from the vicissitudes of the drama of life.
The sense of self having been firmly established in Magha, self -absorption reaches a peak in
this nakshatra. Just like a tired person looking for some place and time to rest, the concerns here are
me, myself and I. The intensive absorption of this nakshatra makes it dramatic. The fact that it falls
in the middle of the sign of dramatics, Leo, fufther encourages this tendency, making it the most
theatrical amongst the nakshatras. Purvaphalguni natives have a strong desire to be noticed for
what they are and what they do. This is the reason why a lot of Purvaphalguni natives fall prey to
pretentious behaviour and attitudes. Learning anything, especially new things, becomes very hard
for such natjves as they don't want to look beyond their own little world, no matter how superficial
it might be. If it wasn't for Purvaphalguni, terms like "vanity" and "pompousness" wouldn't exist.
Despite its self-indulgent eccentricity, Purvaphalguni is a social nakhatra. It likes to function
within prevailing social standards. Despite its natural fixed character, it shows amazing flexibility
when it comes to fitting the prevailing social norms. It likes the comfort and safety of blending in,
rather than standing out. In its positive aspect, Purvaphalguni can be a warm, susbaining and nourishing
influence on those around then. It is one of the cornerstone nakshatras which keep up the pillars of
human society.
Having said this, it must be remembered that Purvaphalguni is a naturally cruel nakshatra and
therefore natives under its strong influence can be expected to be capable of carrying out ruthless

[page 167]
173
acts. Purvaphalguni's cruelty usually comes out when its rest, relaxation or amusement is disturbed
by an outside agency. Natives under its influence get easily hurt and get extremely vindictive over
small issues. This is especially the case if they don't get the requisite amount of attention from
others which they think they deserve in their own minds.
Despite their limitations of pride, jealousy and vindictiveness, these natives are quite delightful
creatures to be around when appreciating the finer enjoyments in life. They can be the most fun to
hang around socially, as they radiate their Leonine warmth and beneficence from their position on
the bed or couch. It is very easy to spot a Purvaphalguni native in a crowd as they will be the one in
the most comfortable spot. They are usually in no hurry to begin the dayt activities and like to lead
lives of luxury even if they can't afford to. They are not overachievers except in areas where litde
physical discomfort is demanded of them. They are happy idling about in the offrce, in the arts
studio, making love or enteftaining others with their personality. Most of their efforts go in trying to
make themselves comfoftable or exploring their own personal feelings, thoughts and emotions.
They usually end up having a family but are often not very suited for the parental role. Their sdf-
obsessive aspect usually makes them cruel or unneruing for their children.
In the universal scheme of things, Purvaphalguni relates to "pralanana shakti" - the power to
procreate. Its symbolism has female above and male below. It is immediately apparent that
Purvaphalguni is all about creation through union of the polar natural opposites. Its objective is
creation of a family on the macrocosmic as well as microcosmic level.
Modz of functioning :
Purvaphalguni is considered to be a Balanced nakshatra. Purvaphalguni balances creativity with
relaxation, work with pleasure, aggression with gentleness. The aesthetically refined aspect of this
nakshatra arises out of its ability to find a delicate balance with objects, colours and the like. As far
as being active is concerned, it is a lazy nakshatra.

[page 168]
174
Caste :
It belongs to the Bnhmin caste. Puruaphalguni relays the brahminical side of the brahmin
pfanet Venus. Shukra Charya, the.presiding deity of Venus, is the perceptor of the demons and has
the unique distinction of knowing Sanjivinividya (knowledge of bringing the dead back to life), which
etten Brihaspafi, the perceptor of the gods, does not possess. A brahmin is someone who is supposed
to understand the secret functionings of Maya and Venus's association with Puwaphalguni relates it
to all kinds of occult knowledge.
Qen[er :
It is a Female nakshatra. Even though both of its ruling deities are male, the primary impulses
of this nakshatra, like beauty, vanity, love of ease, comfoft and luxury are all primarily feminine
concerns. They come about due to this nakshatra's strong connection with Venus,which is seen in
JyoUsh as a feminine planet.
tsodypats & l{umor (Aytnedb Corutitution) :
The Sex Organs, the Lips and the Right Hand are the body parts related to this nakshatra.
It is a primarily "Pitta" (fiery) nakshatra. Its pitta quality arises out of its connection with Leo,
a pitta sign and Sun, a pitba planet. Fire is the essence of desire.
Directbn :
It is related primarily to the directional arc between south east and east.

[page 169]
175
eadns (@nrters)
The first pada or quafter of this asterism 13" 20' - 16o 40' Leo falls in Leo Navamsa ruled by
Sun. The emphasis here is on just I, I & more I. The srolved souls can use the warmth of their soul
power to illuminate the minds of those around them, whereas for younger souls planets in this pada
just heighten the ego. "Dignity" and "Regality" are the keywords here. Sun, Mars, Jupiter and Ketu
can function strongly here and give some soft of executive ability.
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 16o 40' - 20" 00' Leo falls in Virgo Navamsa ruled
by Mercury. This is the most sober and hardworking amongst all of these naturally pompous and lazy
padas, The emphasis here is on trade and enterprise. A well placed Mercury here can give good
common sense and heavy gains through trade.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 20" 00' - 23o 20' Leo falls in Libra Navamsa ruled by
Venus. This pada brings out the indulgent as well as creative Venusian aspect of Purvaphalguni. The
emphasis here is on travel, harmony, relaxation, refinement, counselling, creation and appreciation
of beauty. Since this is the Pushkara Navamsha pada most planets except Sun give good results
here. Venus is especially strong in this pada.
The fourth pada or quafter of this asterism 23o 20' - 26o 40' Leo falls in Scorpio Navamsa ruled
by Mars. The emphasis here is on intensified emotions, home and family life, self reflection and
personal valour. Passions are very strong here and all things in life are approached with a martian
spirit. Planets here usually give rise to a lot of unnecessary strife and complexity. Only a well placed
Sun and Jupiter are capable of utilizing this pada's inner positive fashion.
{Profusioru :
Animal trainers; Government Officials; Executives; Diplomats; Dealers in products related to
women; Gemstone Industry; Entertainers; Beauticians; Make up Artists; Models; Photographers;
Event Managers; Art Gallery Managers; Singers, mostly romantic types; Musicians (more into
harmonies than other aspects of music); Creative Aftists; Teaching profession in general; Dyemakers;

[page 170]
176
Physical Fitness Trainers; Interior Decorators and Designers; All professions connected with Marriages'
Marriage Ceremonies & Childbifths; Nannies; Doctors (both Naturopaths and Allopaths); Sex-
Therapists; Sleep Therapists; Masseurs; Those involved in Dating Agencies; Biologists; Leisure and
Tourism Industry; People connected with Production & Distribution of Incenses, Toiletries and related
Venusian Products; Goldsmiths & Jewellers; Wool, Cotton and Silk industry; Secretarial jobs.
!P["acu :
Hot tropical landscapes; Flowery landscapes; Beaches; Entertainment halls; Exhibition places;
Bedroom; Tourist resorts; Spas; Living rooms; Art galleries; Beauty parlours; Markets, especially the
kind related to Venusian products; Pretty cottages, buildings and homes; All places connected with
the above mentioned prdessions.
guna (tuserce) anl tattwa (Elpttunt) :
It is supposed to be a Rajasic nakshatra. Purvaphalguni is very engrossed on the material
plane. Its planetary ruler Venus is supposed to be the most r{asic among planets. It represents the
"desire" aspect of nature, Which breeds life and makes the whole process of living exciting and
delightful. '
It belongs to the Water element. Purvaphalguni's connection with Venus, a watery planet,
would account for this classification. Water breeds life (it is clear that'all sentient life began in the
oceans), and Purvaphalguni is representative of the creative potential in nature. Even sperm are
canied by a watery fluid known as semen and the nnting of sperm with the ova takes place in a
watery medium.

[page 171]
t77
Qana (Iype) :
It is considered a tVanrchaor human nakshatra. Puruaphalguni's strong involvement with society,
human relationships and procreation make it very concerned with what can be termed as human
affairs. It is one of the nakshatras dedicated to sustaining the drama of life.
Orientation an[ Dispositbn :
It is an Upward nakshatra. Purvaphalguni fosters any kind of growth. The seed may lie beneath
the ground, but the plant grows upwards. Puruaphalguni is intimately connected with the biological
process of cell division, which is responsible for making a tree out of a seed, or a baby out of a
sperm. Puruaphalguni natives always look upwards towards the sky, the gods and the creator for its
inspiration and answers
It is an Ugra or fierce nakshatra. It comes as a surprise that a soft, pleasure loving and comfoft
seeking nakshatra should have a fierce temperament. This relates to Purvaphalguni's tendency to
get oveftly disgusted when it does not get what it wants. As we have discussed earlier, Puruaphalguni
natives are prepared to go to any lengths in order to secure the luxury and comfoft which they think
is their right. Disturbing Puruaphalguni's comfoft zone is akin to disturbing a sleeping lion.
Lunar Montfi d Daq :
It relates to the first half of the lunar month of Phalguna, which usually falls in late February in
the solar calendar.
Purva Phalguni is also related tothe Traydashi (13th Uthi or day) of tlre waxing and waning
phases of the Moon's monthly cycle.
,€n'

[page 172]
178
Auspitioru Actiaitits:
Marriage, sex, romance; Good for dealing with authorities and all kinds of persuasion; A good
nakshatra for clearing out the air in relation to long standing disputes; Good for confronting enemies
in a gentle appeasing way; Rest, relaxation and enjoyment; Artistic activities like painting, singing
etc. ; Good for using charisma or personal power for gaining wanted ends; Good for buying property;
Matters relating to property and construction in general.
Inauspiciotts Actirtitits :
Unfavourable for all activities which require lessening down of ego; Not good for starting new
things; Not good for intellectual activities; Not good for healing or curing diseases; Illnesses which
start at this time are hard to overcome.
9fanztary fu.br :
Sun and Venus are the two planets related to this nakshatra, Venus being its main planetary
ruler. Venus's involvement with this nakshatra is obvious from the fact that the main functioning of
Purvaphalguni. is procreation. Venus relates to the force which produces attraction between the
opposite sexes and the main focus of Purvaphalguni centres around this attraction. Sun, however, is
connected with one's sense of self and is not very comfoftable with the idea of losing one's self to
another, something which Venus naturally stands for. Purvaphalguni is a battleground for the conflict
between ego, love and harmony. It helps to know that the Venusian energy is stronger in comparision
to Solar energy here (in Krittil<a it was the opposite way round).
The fact that Sun and Venus are natural enemies makes Puruaphalguni a volatile and turbulent
nakshatrc. The decision to be made here is how much of the self should be sacrificed in order for
love and harmony to find their rightful place. Creativity is the only common meeting point between
Sun and Venus. This is the reason why Purvaphalguni is able to be creative and constructive despite
a plethora of inner rages and tumults.

[page 173]
179
Sun/Venus conjunction or exchange in a horoscope carries energies similar to purvaphalguni.
Sun, Mars and Venus usually give strong results here but as always a lot depends on the pada they
occupy.
Uowefs an"d Alpfiaiets :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 13o 20' -160 40' Leo corresponds to "Mo', as in
Mohicans.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 160 40' - 20" O0' Leo corresponds b -Ia,'as in
Taina.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 20o 00' - 23o 20'Leo corresponds to 'Tee" as in Tina.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 23o 20' - 26" 40' Leo corresponds to ,Too" as in
Tooth.
In the Sanskrit alphabet Puivaphalguni corresponds to "Cha'i consequengy its manba is',Om
Cham".
Seryat'lype and Compatihility :
Its sexual animal is a Rat, thus its sexual nature is similar to that of Magha, the previous
nakshatra. As discussed earlier, rats aie highly reproductive animals and produce scores of progeny.
They are always busy scurrying around, which makes Purvaphalguni quite indefatigable when it
comes to sexual or creative activity. Purvaphalguni is most compatible with the other rat nakshatra,
Magha.
For sexual & marital compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the tables on pages 457
&458.

[page 174]
180
'F-soterb
Puruaphalguni relates to the masculine creative spark which touches upon the passive feminine
principle and puts it into creative motion. The feminine principle in nature is by itself passive (the
quality which makes Purvaphalguni lazy), and needs an external force to set it alight. The Moon'
which represents the feminine principle among planets, also needs a rnale spurce in form of the Sun
in order to furiction.
Nlthe Puranicstories relating to Shiuabphallus and tlre reasons why Shiva is worshipped in the
phallic form relate to Puruaphalguni's functioning
In a famous story the seven sages living in a Himalayan pine forest in Krita Yuga (the golden
age) are tormented by Shiva who visits their hermitage in a wild, naked form and all the womenfolk
get seduced by his erect hanging phallus. The sages in their puritanical narrowmindedness curse
that Shiva's phallus should fall off. Shiva respects their wishes and lets his phallus get castrated. As
soon as this happens the whole balance of the universe gets unsettled. Brahma interuenes and asks
the sages to worship the Linga (phallus) they had castrated in their moment of foolishness. Shiva
pleased by their devotion and worship takes on his Linga again and thus universal balance is restored.
Even in the present age, Shiva is still primarily worshipped in a Linga form to make sure that
puritanicalism never steps over the male primeval regenerative principle represented by the Linga,
Amongst the nakshatras, Purvaphalguni and uttaraphalgunirelate to this impoftant aspect of universal
functioning.
Purvaphalguni relates to the Bhakti path where the devotee likes to see the supreme governing
entity as "the Beloved". The lives of bhakti saint figures like Surdas and Mera, who saw Krishna as
a playmate and beloved respectively, illustrate Purvaphalguni's way of encountering the eternal
divinity.

[page 175]
181
Qotra (Cetutlat Lineage)
This nakshatra is related to the Sage Atri, one of the seven celestial sages lmking after the
affairs of our galaxy. The name of this sage translates into "one who consumes". As we have discussed
in Rohini, the sage Atri seems to have two opposing tendencies, creative and dissoluting. Along with
Rohini, Purvaphalguni relates to the creative aspect of this sage.
\enrc[iat
Worship of Laxmi and other goddesses related to creativity and prosperity; worship of all futtility
goddesses; worship of Shiva through his Shiva Lingam - are all good ways to harness the creaUve
potential of this nakshatra.
Repetition of the root mantra of this nakshatra - "Om Cham" 108 times when Moon transits this
nakshatra and in its corresponding lunar month is sure to reduce suffering and bring enlightenment
into a person's life.
Persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this nakshatra can also increase the
good effects through the above mentioned ways. It is helpful for them to wear all light, variegated
colours and pastel shades, especially yellows, pinks and whites. Predominantly feminine designs and
accessories are good. They should use its directions, lunar month and the.days when Moon transits
Purvaphalguni to undeftake all important actions.
Eapmp[e:
Madonna, the famous popstar, has her Moon and Ascendant in this nakshatra. Even though the
gaudier side of this nakshatra is expressed through her music and showmanship, she has profited
from utilizing the sexual aspect of this nakshatra.

[page 176]
182
Mbu[awous:
According to Varahamihin, those with Moon in Purvaphalguni are "generous in bestowing liberal
gifts, have sweet speech, pleasing manners, a habit of wandering and often serve the govemmant in
one way or the other". Even though our example doesn't seem to be directly related to government
functionings, the truth is that she is one of the many pawns who are used by the ruling elite for
directing mass trends and tastes.

[page 177]
I z. Ot+ar.ph.lgrrri ?,6"1f, [-eo - | o"oo' \f irgo

[page 178]
L2.
Attarapfiatgw.i
(26040' Leo - 10o00' Virgo)
In tfic Sky t
Uttaraphalguni is the 12h asterism and consists of two very contrasting stars, known in modern
astronomy as Beta-Lanis and 93-Lunis. These two stars lie at the tail end of the constellation of
Lef' Denebola (Beta-Leonis) is among the brightest stars in the night sky with a visual magnitude of
2.13. 93-Leonis on the other hand is a relatively faint star with a visual magnitude of 4.53.
A{ame :
Uttaraphalguni translates into "the latter reddish one" or "the latter fig Fee". The month of
Phalguna relates to the spring season. We can thus immediately associate Utbraphalguni with all
the feelings evoked by the spring season. Obviously Uttaraphalguni will relate more to the latter half
of spring instead of the beginning, which would relate more to the previous nakshatra.
Sgm6o[:
The main symbol of this nakshatra is the two back legs of a bed. Like Puruaphalguni,the bed
referred to here is not the bed we use for sleeping on during the night time, but a divan or bed/couch
used for a daytime siesta or lounging around. This nakshatra is similar to Puruaphalguni in many
ways just as the symbolism suggests. In fact Purvaphalguni and Uttaraphalguni form a pair, the first

[page 179]
186
in the sequence of nakshatras. They share similar names, symbolism, nature and quality although
there a slight differences.
As we discussed in the previous nakshatra, the bed or hammock represents a place for rest,
comfort and relaxation. The fact that Uttaraphalguni is related to the back legs and not the front legs
of a bed, relates it to the second half of a siesta or lounging around. Usually this second half is much
more active is one is mentally getting off the relaxation mode and preparing for work.
Llttaraphalguni is thus less comfort-oriented in comparison to its counterpart Purvaphalguni. It
relates to someone lying on a couch talking, thinking, or contemplating or involved in some kind of
activity like writing, reading, sexual etc.
The fully grown fig tree (refer to the image), represents the notion that Uttaraphalguni has the
capacity to actually provide fruit, while Puruaphalguni, which is related to a growing fig tree, has the
potential for bearing fruit but is not actually ripe enough to do so. Uttaraphalguni can thus be seen
as a productive rather than a purely recreational, enjoyment orkntatd and indulgent energy.
Deity :
Aryaman, one of the 12 Adityas (solar deities), is the main ruling deity of Uttaraphalguni.
Aryaman is seen as a deity presiding over patronage, favours and kindness. Therefore the key
motivation of this nakshatra is towards helping or receiving help from others. Aryaman is seen as the
epitome of hospitality and congeniality, qualities which make Uttaraphalguni a very cultured, social
and civilized nakshatra. tlttaraphalguni, like its presiding deity, is very concerned about eUquettes
and social graces.
Arfaman is also seen as a deity who places strong emphasis on friendship. In Vedic rituals he is
afmost always invoked in a pair, either with Bhaga(the ruling deity of Purvaphalguni), or Mitra(the
presiding deity of Anuradha). It is no wonder then that Uttaraphalguni along with Anuradha is
known for its ability to promote and maintain friendships. Utbaraphalguni however relates more to a
personal one-to-one bosom friendship, while Anuradha relates more to friendliness within a group.

[page 180]
187
Aryaman, being a solar deity, carries alot of the natural significations attached to the Sun as an
astrological entity. He acts like a patron but is bound to lose his temper and act harshly when firmly
contradicted.
Afature d futrctioning :
Most of the nature and functionings of Purvaphalguni apply to Uttaraphalguni as well. Other
than that, the best way to understand Uttaraphalguni's nature and functioning is to understand the
qualities normally associated with the king among the planets, Sun.
The names assigned to Sun in Vedic texts - the illuminator; the chief among the planets; the
ever radiant; the shining one; the soult significator; the cruel and sharp one; the intense one;
bestower of prosperity, wealth and ultimate knowledge - give a clue to its basic energy and attributes.
All these hold true for Littaraphalguni as well.
Sun as we know is the light. ltis a sttwic planet. Sattwa as we know is a quality of nature
whose main objective is to further us along the evolutionary path, through balancing the other two
quaf ities Rajas and Tamas.It is the mode of goodness which has the basic tendency to be helpful to
everyone. Sun shines in the same way on the pauper or the king and is never shy of giving. In the
same light Uttaraphalguni has a tendency to be free with its sharing, charity, benevolence and
philanthropy.
Sun is the only graha which generates its own light. This makes it the most independent among
the grahas, all of whom reflect the light generated by the Sun. This independence forms a part of its
nature and can be witnessed in Uttaraphalguni. This independence relates to establishing one's own
individuality rather than being part of the flock. Alot of us tend to imitate others instead of developing
our own creativity, thoughts and opinions. The word'self-reliant', which in today's world is only
taken in its material aspect, actually refers to reliance on one's own soul for gaining knowledge and
awareness. Uttaraphalguni natives are always seen trying to rise above the sea of mass consciousness.
They are not the types to change their individuality just to stay in sync with whatever is happening.

[page 181]
188
Sun, as is common knowledge, is the father figure. This is clear from the fact that all life on
earth is dependant upon the Sun. Like a typical father figure, Uttaraphalguni has a cruel and harsh
side along with its benevolent life giving side. Uttaraphalguni is also a teacher and preacher at heaft
in much the same Way as Sun and like Sun can be pompous and despotic in its negaUve functioning.
Most of the warlike qualities such as anger, valour, aggression, fearlessness, urge to conquer
and competitive spirit are commonly shared by Sun and Ut[araphalguni. However Uttaraphalguni'
unlike Sun's other nakshatra Krittika, has a more forgiving attitude and is always more interested in
upholding harmony and honour rather than the final victory. The protective and nourishing aspect of
the Sun manifests through Uttaraphalguni' It is gentle but firm.
Uttaraphalguni, having its main portion in the sign Virgo, is the meeting point of the energies of
Sun and Mercury and thus allows for the expression of their blending. Mercury the divine messenger'
is the closest planet to the Sun. The prince (Mercury) is always the closest and dearest to the king
(Sun). In fact Mercury is the only planet which is not afflicted by Sun's tremendous intensity, just like
the prince is never awed by the presence of the king. Together they share the attributes of
discrimination, intelligence, general awareness and the judgemental faculty. In a way both of them
are intellectual planets, but Mercury carries a much more humorous and lighter energy as compared
to the Sun. Intellect (Mercury) has the job of controlling the mind (Moon) but it takes its cue from
the soul (Sun). Mercury can become a frivolous energy unless it establishes proper relaUons with the
Sun. This situation is similar to a messenger without any message or source of news. Sun is the
source from which Mercury has to derive its inspiration. Sun however lacks the communication
ability of Mercury and cannot express itself properly without its help. This is the reason why the
ancient seers extolled the Sun-Mercury combination. This blending of Sun-Mercury energies is very
present in those natives born under Uttaraphalguni'
Uttaraphalguni, like Sun, is straightforward and unhesitating in its dealings. Like Sun,
Uttaraphalguni is ready to serve but only from a position of superiority. There is a certain degree of
ascetism inherent in Uttaraphalguni's nature. It is hard for many of us to imagine how a king can be
an ascetic. An ancient Vedic story about a king called Janaka, in which he proved to a venerable sage
that it is perfecUy possible, is a case in point! :-

[page 182]
189
"He asked the sage to carry a burning lamp all around his palace in such a way that the fire is
not extinguished. When the sage came back from his round the king asked him about the sights he
had seen around his grand palace, The sage couldn't respond as all his concentration had been
focused on the lamp. Janaka then told him that this is the way he rules his kingdom."
Krishna put forward the same doctrine of action without attachment in his discourse to Arq'una
in the fegendary Vedic epic 'The Mahabhanta'l Both Krishna and Arjuna were kings in their own
right and didn't exactly fit the role of an ascetic.
Uttaraphalguni, like Sun, assists in easy expression of the soul personality. This expression
manifests in the outer world as self-confidence, self-assurance and creativity. In a negative sense it
can rnanifest as selfishness, pride, self-aggrandizement or megalomania.
Nobility and dignity are also primari[ solar traits which other planets cannot really imitate.
There's no equal to Sun as far as sticking to one's word or pledge is concerned. Just like it rarely
swerves from its celestial path, it always holds onto its word or promise. There are numerous stories
of Sun personalities which illustrate this aspect of Sun's nature, which is also expressed through
Uttaraphalguni. Another quality which sets it apart from others is its confidence and selfassuredness.
$un also has a devious side to it, which most astrologers ignore. It is a master at fraud and
lying. Uttaraphalguni has a lot to do with this part of Sun's nature because of its strong connection
with the trickster Mercury. In the olden days the kings were supposed to master 64 arts; and lying,
gambling and fraud were among these 64 arts. However it must be noted that Uttaraphalgunitries
to use such tactics for a noble cause. Being the natural significator of the th and 10h houses, Sun
is intimately connected with one's dharma. Uttaraphalguni is very concerned about fulfilling its duty
and assigned goal. It is always very conscious of establishing its path and following it till the end.
In a nativity, Uttaraphalguni rising makes one generous and kind and a good friend towards
others. It gives one a noble reputaUon and makes one skilful at their work. Popularity is due to the
native's reliable and helpful nature. Their physical characteristics mirror that of the Sun, especially
when the birth is in the Leo part of Uttaraphalguni. The Sun can be described as having honey

[page 183]
190
coloured eyes. It has a square body, sturdy bones and sparse curly hair. It has a majestic appearance
and is not very tall. It has a courageous and steady look, its complexion is coppery reddish or
gol@r. It has a proud demeanour.
The Virgo part of Uttaraphalguni adds mercurial traits like flexibility, humour, slenderness, agility
and amiability to the Sun-like appearance of the nauve. The nauve appears more princely as opposed
to kingly.
In the universal scheme of things, Uttaraphalguni relates to 'chayani shaki" - the power of
accumulation & prosperity. Its symbolism has wealth from onet own family below and wealth from
one's spouse's fami[ above. This relates Uttaraphalguni to all types of gains made through family,
partnerships and unions. It is Uttaraphalguni's duty to uUlize these resources properly, and be generous
and fair in their distribution,
Modp of functionirg :
Uttaraphalguni is considered to be a Balanced nakshatq Its balancing quality is pretty evident
ftom the nature of its ruling deity Aryaman. One needs to have a balanced personality to have social
graces, kindness, compassion and friendliness towards other living creatures. In a way Uttaraphalguni
mirrors the sign Libra when it comes to all that is encompassed by the term "balance". The only
difference is that Uttaraphalguni is more likely to hold onto its pivot or fixed centre, while the sign
Libra is known to drown its essential nature in order to achieve balance and harmony. ,
Caste
This nakshatra falls in the Kshatriya(ruling/warrior) class of nakshatras and makes one concerned
about society and how to direct one's energy towards noble causes. It also suggests concern for
some kind of accomplishment on the material plane so one c;itn occupy a position of power or
strength. Once again its Kshatriya qualities are derived from its association with the Kshatriya planet
Sun.

[page 184]
191
Qentrer :
It is a Female nakshatra. This is a perplexing classification considering that both its ruling
planet and ruling deity are male. When one considers that the bulk of this nakshatra falls in the
feminine sign of Virgo, one can make some sense of the line of thinking behind this classification.
Uttaraphalguni, as we have discussed earlier, is connected to predominantly feminine archetypes
like grace, kindness, benevolence, consideration and receptivity.
tsodyp'arts U Ifuttror (fuule[ic Constitution) :
Lips, Sex Organs and the Left Hand are the body parts related to this nakshatra.
It is a primarily "Vata" (airy) nakshatra. The only reason, which seems to be behind this
classification, is that the major paft of this nakshatra lies in the predominantly vata sign of Virgo.
Mercury the ruler of Virgo, is also seen as a predominantly vata planet. We can however assurne
that the part of Uttaraphalguni lying within Leo would show Pitta rather than vata characteristics.
Direction :
The two directions it relates to most strongly are east and south.
gadns (Qnrters)j
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 260 40' - 30" 00' Leo, falls in Sagittarius Navamsa ruled
by Jupiter. This pada relates to the Jupiterian side of the solar nature. It is like a Sunf upiter conjunction
and gives a strongly ethical nature along with an advisory capacity. Planets placed here give foftunate,
expansive resulb as long as they are in good Shashtiamsha.
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 00o 00' - 30 20' Virgo, falls in Capricorn Navamsa
ruled by Saturn. This pada is akin to a Sun/Mercury/Saturn conjunction and gives a tremendous

[page 185]
192
organizational ability. Planets placed here usually give very good material results and a practical,
hardworking nature.
The third pada or quafter of this asterism 30 20'- 6o 40' Virgo, falls in Aquarius Navamsa ruled
by Saturn. This pada relates to the philanthropic side of Uttaraphalguni. The keyword here is seruice.
The intellectual abilities are sharp here and are usually used for the social good. Planets placed in
this pada tend'to work in a Robin Hoodfashion
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 60 40' - 10o 00' Virgo, falls in Pisces Navamsa ruled
by Jupiter. This pada is akin to a Sun/Mercury/Jupiter conjunction. Out here the intellectual abilities
are always utilized for seeing the bigger picture and relating to others. A balance between the small
and the big, matter and spirit, Virgo and Pisces is sought here. Since this is a Pushkara navamsa
pada, planets placed here give strong, favourable results on a material as well as spiritual plane.
lProfusiors :
Creative Aftists, Musicians, Entertainers; Superstars & Male Sex Symbols; Managers; Leaders
of all types & Public Figures like Sport Superstars; Those in high positions and held in esteem by
others; Media & Enteftainment industy; Priests; Heads of organizations; Mafia Dons; Teachers &
Preachers; Philanthropists; Astrologers; Marriage Counsellors; Sex Therapists; Professions connected
to United Nations; International Diplomats; Founding fathers and other Patriotic Figures; Bankers &
Geditors; Social Workers; Professional Advisors in all fields.
Uttaraphalguni is highly flexible in regards to professions and can be seen in a variety of
professions as long as it is in a commanding position.
Qlacu :
Forests; Gardens; Estates; Public Buildings; Government Buildings; Stadiums; Enteftainment
Halls; Residences of Rich & Famous People; Palaces, Towers, Large Halls; Playgrounds; Cathedrals &
other magnificent buildings; Public Assemblies; United Nation's Buildings; Libraries.

[page 186]
193
Quna ('Essence) and tattula (E(tment) :
This nakhatra belongs to the Rajasic aroup of nakshatras. Not much needs to be said here, as
tlttaraphalguni in its descriptions naturally comes out as an active, energetic nakshatra.
It belongs to the Fire element. This as we can see has a lot to do with ib planetary ruler Sun
and its solar deity Aryaman.
Qana (,TWd '
It is considered a Manushya(human) nakshatra. Uttaraphalguni, as we have discussed earlier,
is very involved in worldly affairs on the terrestrial plane. All human values like family, society,
friendship etc. find expression through this nakshatra. Utlaraphalguni in a way is a harbinger of
culture and civilization.
Orientation U Disposition :
It is a Downward nakshatra. Uttaraphalguni, because of its natural fixed character,is best for
laying foundations. Its involvement with foundations and support of all types makes it a downward
nakshatra. In a building, Uttaraphalguni will always relate more to the foundation stone or the
foundation itself.
As mentioned previously, it is a Dhruua(fixed or permanent) nakshatra . Despite its receptivity,
amicability and friendliness, Uttaraphalguni is quite fixed in its thinkings, opinions and functionings.
This is probably the reason why it can always be relied upon. It tends not to sway away from vows
and pleasures, especially those relating to friendship. This fixed quality obviously stems from its
solar aspect.

[page 187]
194
Lurur.r Montfr d Day :
It relates to the second half of the lunar month of Phalguna, which usually conesponds to the
month of March in the solar calendar.
tlttaraphafguni is also related ta tte Duadashi(12d' U$i or day) of the waxing and waning
phases of the Moon's monthly cycle.
Auspicioru Actiuitirs :
Favourable fur sexual activity and marriage; Generally auspicious for beginning all things of a
lasting nature like organizations, societies, etc.; Good for marriage and sexual activity; Good for
dealing with higher authorities; Good for administrative actions of all types; Buying property or
entering a new home for the first time; Openings/inauguration ceremonies & swearing-ins; Making
promises; Pedorming sacred ceremonies & rituals; Wearing new clothes and jewellery; Acts of
charity; Career related activities; Paternal activities; Good for activities requiring tact and diplomacy.
Inauspirious Actirtities :
. Unfavourable for endings of all types; Not good for harsh activities like confrontation, retaliation
or engaging with enemies; Not good for lending money if you are expecting it back'
lPfanztary forkr :
Sun is the planetary ruler of this nakshatm. The solar aspect of nature comes into manifestation
in the earlier nakhatra, Krittika. Uttaraphalguni relates to the process where the solar principle
affects and organizes the material world, just like Sun's rays can cook food in a solar cooker. The
primordial solar principle manifests as willpower in Krittika, but it takes the form of intelligence in
LJttaraphalguni, with the aid of Mercury.

[page 188]
195
Mercury is associated with Uttaraphalguni, due to the fact that a major part of Uttaraphalguni
lies in Virgo, a sign ruled by Mercury. Uttaraphalguni is all about the linking between soul and
intellect. Under this nakshatra's influence, the solar energy is directed towards actual practical work
in order to achieve certain goals which the soul has set for itself, and also help out others along the
way as well. Just as all living life on our planet is dependant upon Sun's rays, all society and civilization
is dependant upon the guidance of this nakshatra.
Sun/Mercury conjunction in a horoscope carries energies similar to Uttaraphalguni. Friends of
Sun like Moon, Mercury Mars & Jupiter do well here; while Venus, Saturn, Rahu and Ketu feel
obstructed here, especially Venus, due to its in debilitation in the Virgo part of this nakshatra.
Uouek anl A[pfia.6e* :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 26" 40'- 30o 00' Leo corresponds to "Tay" as in Taylor.
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 00o 00' - 3o 20' Virgo corresponds to "To" as in
Tohnamah.
The third pada or quafter of this asterism 30 20'- 6o 40' Virgo corresponds to "Pa" as in Pascal.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 6" 40' - 10o O0' Virgo corresponds to "Pee" as in
Peter.
In the Sanskrit alphabet Uttaraphalguni corresponds-to "Chha" and "Ja", consequently its mangas
are "Om Chham" and "Om Jam (Jahm)".
Sery.at Tgpe an[ Compatiftility :
The sexual animal associated with this nakshatra is a Cow, which suggests its nurturing and
passive qualities. Although this nakshatra has noble qualities attached to it it is said to give reputation
or scandal through sexual adventures. This nakshatra has an adventurous element, which seems to
express itself mostly in the sexual realm.

[page 189]
196
For sexual compatibility & marital compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the tables
on pages 457 & 458.
f-soteric :
The interesting thing about Uttaraphalguni is that it relates most closely to the visible physical
Sun of our solar system, which we see rising every morning. The physical body of our Sun may have
started forming around 5 billion years ago, but the actual causal solar entity we know as Vivasvan,
might not have entered until a later time, just like the astral body only enters the physical body after
the embryo has been developed up to a certain stage. This will also explain the fact that not every
star in the sky has a solar system which breeds lifel Only those stars which have an astral/causal
entity housing them have the potential to breed life. :
The names of the Sun's eleven brothers who are all born out of the union of sage Kashyapa and
his wife Miti(tnnslates into 'infinite space' and governs the nakshatra Punatvasu) are' Aryaman,
Dhatra, Tuastaq pushan, Savitaf Mitra, Varuna, Amasa, Bhaa, Vishnu & Shakra. We can see that
almost all of these solar deities are related with nakshatras - Aryaman with Uttara Phalguni' Mitra
with Anuradha(the 17h asterism), Pushanwith Reuati (the 27h asterism), Savitarwith Hasta (the
13h asterism) , Tuastarwitt Cltitm (the14s a$erism) and Varunawith Shatabhisha (the 24b asterism)'
The fact that this nakshatra has its first quarter in the sign Leo relates to the regal authoritarian
side of this asterism. It is a doubling of solar energy. Since its last three quarters lie in the sign under
Mercury an intellectual bent is obserued in the workings of this asterism. On a spiritual level, the
main aim of this nakshatra is the harmonization of the intellect (Mercury) and soul (Sun), which aids
evolutionary growth, along with bringing benefits on the material plane. This asterism relates to the
culmination of the individualization process as it covers the final degrees of the sign Leo. After the
individualization process is over the individual is expected to be of servie to a greater whole. The
seruice aspect of this asterism comes out through the sign normally associated with seruice, Virgo.

[page 190]
197
The characteristics usually associated with the number "12" in numerology are mostly borne
out of the nature and functionings of this nakshatra. Ut[araphalguni forms the bridge between the
numbers 5 & 6 and also between the numbers 11 & 12.
This asterism can be seen as the Egyptian Sphinx, which in a sense symbolizes harmonization
of the energies of the signs Leo and Virgo. It relates to a period of time in history (around
10,500 B.C.), where the spring equinox was passing from the sign Virgo to the sign Leo. Many
believe it to be a time of great upheaval and re-alignment, as the last great flood was supposed to
have taken place around that time. This illustrates the importance of this nakshatra for human life
on earth.
Qotra (CetesUat Lircage) : ..:' : '.1, .., :
This nakshatra is related to the Sage Pulasthya, one of the seven celestial sages looking after
the affairs of our galary. The name of this sage translates into "having smooth hai/'. The term
'smooth hair' may relate to the hair of the sophistocated, sawy nature of the Sage in question,
which will then vibe well with the essential qualities of this nakshatra.
fume{iat :
For those suffering from bad effects resulting from afflictions to this nakshatra, the best remedial
measure is worship of the Sun. Recitation of the Gayatri mantra is very helpful for natives under
strong Uttaraphalguni influence. People can refer to the author's previous work, "Sun - The Cosmic
PowerHouse" (Sagar Publications, India) for remedial measures associated with the Sun. Worship of
Durga and other warrior like feminine deities also suit this nakshatra.
Repetition of the root manfas of tris nakshatra - "Om Chham" and "Om Jam" 108 times when
Moon transits this nakshatra and in its corresponding lunar month, is sure to reduce suffering and
bring enlightenment into a person's life.

[page 191]
198
Persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this nakshatra can also increase the
good effects through the above mentioned ways. It is helpful for them to wear all red, white, green
and golden shades. The shade should be neither too bright nor too dull, but fall somewhere in
between. They should use its directions, lunar month and the days when Moon transits Uttaraphalguni
to undeftake all important actions.
E4pnp[c :
Gorge Washington, one of the founding fathers of America, was born with Uttaraphalguni
rising on his ascendant. It is interesting to note that he fashioned the capital city of Washington
(bearing his name) on the sign Virgo. We can assume that its foundation stone must have been laid
with Uttaraphalguni rising for it to become the center of world power ard have the permanence it
has had.
Waren Beatty, the famous Hollywood star, has Uttaraphalguni rising on his Ascendant. In
keeping with Uttaraphalguni's natural tendencies, Warren Beatty ended up having a cassanova image
and was seen as the biggest sex symbol of his time.
Misceffaneous :
According to Varahamihira, those with Moon in Uttaraphalguni "earn through their knowledge,
are well liked and popular and live a life of comfoft and luxury". The author of this book has his Moon
placed in the foutth pada of Uttaraphalguni.
**:t

[page 192]
t
J
.:@ul
ilisr'
,:,rn:
I o"oo' \t/irgo - zr"zo'Vttgo

[page 193]
13.
Y{nsn
(10000' Virgo - 23020' Virgo)
In tfu SkU t
Hasfa consists of five prominent easily visible stars of the constellation known as Corui (the
Crow), which lies below the constellation of Virgo. These five stars, whose grouping was seen by the
ancient Vedic seers as resembling the top of a hand (five fingeftips), are known in modern astronomy
as Alpha-&rui(Alchiba), Beta-Corui, Delta-Corui(Algonb), Gamma-hrui(Gienah)& Epsilon-Corui.
Beta-Coli is the brightest among these stars with a visual magnitude of 2.66. The constellation
representing this asterism Corvi can be located in the night sky below the constellation Virgo to the
right hand side of the zodiacal belt. It lies very close to the right hand side of Spica, one of the
brightest stars and can thus be easily spotted despite its relative faintness
Abme :
Hasta's main translation is "the hand". As we shall find in the course of this section, this seemingly
general and inconsequential name conveys a major part of this asterism's nature, activities and
approach.
Its alternative translation is "laughter". The root "Has" in Sanskit means "to laugh". The ancient
seers must have picked this name as a pun on a nakshatra most closely associated with pun. Its
alternative names "Bhanu" and 'Ark" translate into "Sun" and "Sun's Ray" respectively. The association
of Hasta with Sun and the solar principle will become clear as we discuss its symbols and ruling deity.

[page 194]
202
Syrnfiot :
Hasta has three main symbols. One symbol is "a hand with all five fingers spread-eagled".
Through this symbol, the ancient seers are trying to emphasize Hasta's relation with fate. One can
see all the lines in the palm when a hand is spread out. These lines in the palm as we know, relate
to our destiny in the present life. Hasta is closely connected to the art of palmistry and by extrapolation,
Rstrology. Thd hand also simply relates to all activities done with the use of the hands. This will be
expanded upon later. In ancient times the outstretched hand was a symbol of the Sun, with the
fingers representing its rays. The relationship of this nakshatra with the Sun is established through
its ruling deity .
The second symbol is "a clenched fist", which exemplifies secrecy and determination. Hasta, as
we shall discover, is related to all kinds of activities like trickery deceit and manipulation involving
the use of the above two qualities. The clenched fist in its negative aspect represents greed, ambition
and an inability to let go of things. In its positive aspect, it represents strength which is derived
through unity and harmonious working of pafts.
Hasta is the nakshatra most closely associated with cooperation in order to achieve the intended
goal. This cooperation however has very little to do with friendship, as there is a distinct lack of trust .
in all Hasta bondings. It is no wonder that shaking hands is the most commonly used act for bonding
in the modern times. This immediately reflects the modern world's obssession with cooperation
without trust.
The third and more rarely used symbol of Hasta is "a potter's wheel". A potter's wheel has its
obvious association with pottery making and all types of handicrafts in general. On an esoteric level
the potter's wheel symbolizes the passage of time. Hasta is often very concerned about the proper
utilization of Ume. It is very prone to go to o(tremes in relation to this issue and turn life into a clock.
It is obssessed with time keeping, punctuality, repetition and other such robotic tmits usually associated
with the sign Virgo.

[page 195]
203
Deity :
lust like the previous two nakshatras, a solar deity presides over Hasta. This solar deity is
named " 9uitar". His name has two translations - "the impeller" and "the first nys of the rising Sun".
As an "impeller", Savitar is seen as a god who gives life. Hasta is therefore known as a nakshatra
which aids childbirth. The "first rays of the rising Sun" represent the awakening potential of Hasta in
all ancient cultuies and civilizations. The first rays of sunrise were a signal for all people to begin
their day's activities, its function being similar to an alarm clock today. We can thus infer that Hasta
has all to do with the terms activity and alertness. Hasta is the proverbial'wake up call', a term which
should be read from both a material and spiritual perspective.
Savitar has a jovial, lighthearted type of persona. He is always portrayed with a laughing gesture.
He is a playful deity into all kinds of tricks, amusements and games. This makes Hasta interested in
all kinds of sporb on all planes of existence. On the terrestrial earthly plane, Hasta relates to botl
mind games and physical sports.
Savitar is supposed to be extremely skilled with his hands. This makes Hasta directly associated
with evefihing done with the hands. The reasoning behind the naming of Hasta should now be
clear to us. Savitar is also considered to be a crafty trickster, taking pleasure in lying, gambling and
fraud. These qualities don't seem like the kind which one would associate with a solar deity but the
truth is that even the planet Sun has this cunning, crafty side to its nature, which is more often than
not overlooked by astrologers. In the ancient times all kings (represented by Sun) were supposed to
be well versed in the alts of lying, deceit, fraud, gambling and robbery. The readers can refer to the
author's previous work ("Sun-The Cosmic Powqlrous" hgar Publications, India) for more details
on this aspect of the Sun's nature.
Savitar is almost mercurial in his approach, which does not come as a surprise since all of this
nakshatra falls in Virgo, a sign ruled by Mercury. Savitar can be seen as a deity who fuses the
energies of Sun and Mercury. His qualities are very similar to those ascribed to the Budha-ditya yoga
(Sun/Mercury conjunction in a sign or house). Again the reader can refer to "Sun-The Cosmic
Powerhoure" for more information on this yoga. . ,;., r.. r. .

[page 196]
2U
In a way the nature and functioning of Savitar is akin to a bright sunny day where everyone is
feeling good and are involved in creative activities of all kinds. This is what makes Hasta one of the
nrost optimistic and creative nakshatras.
fr{g.ture A func rottitrg
Common english words like "hand", "handy", "haste", "hassle", 'haggle", "have", "hard",
"harness", "hack", "harvest" - seem to have the same root as the word "Hasta", Their meanings
refate to Hasta's functioning at some level or the other. The well known greeting "Hasta Maniana"
sheds light on Hasta's jovial and easy going approach and its relationship with all kinds of endings.
Hasta follows Uttaraphalguni, the nakshatra in which a family is established. After the
establishment of a family, issues like continuity and sustenance crop up. There are little and big
things to be done on a regular basis to keep the household going. Hasta relates to all the little
activiues which make civilized living possible. It is no surprise that Hasta natives are the handymen
of the zodiac. They also make excellent householders. Even though they take their work seriously,
there is always some internal lightheartedness underneath. They are very good at carrying plain
ftces and stern exteriors. Even the comedians which use this nakshatra's energies, bring out humour
through deadpan, stnight, serious facial expressions.
When Hasta rises on the Ascendant it produces highly flexible and supple bodies capable of
handling a variety of manualjobs. They often have some type of acrobatic skill. They have small
eyes and roundish faces. They have mischievous smiles and like to squint a lot. They love to laugh
and play the joker. They have quick, sharp minds which constantly process whatever they obserue'
They like to think along practical lines and have a tendency to look down upon romantically bohemian
attitudes. Theirs is a world of classification, order and arrangement. Hasta natives have a tendency
br overwork arising from an inability to sit still. They can get obssessive about keeping themselves
busy, a trait which makes them invent unnecessary tasks or complicate relatively simple tasks. No
other nakshafia comes close to Hasta when it comes to an eye for detail. They work at things
painstakingly and expect others to do the same. They can be exBemely criUcal when their high

[page 197]
205
standards are not met. Hasta usually gives some soft of tension with progeny if related to the fifth
house in any way.
In the universal scheme of things, Hasta relates to 'hasta sthapaniya agama shakti" - the
power to put one's object of desire in one's hands. Its symbolism has attainment of the object above
and the process of attainment below. The symbolism makes it clear beyond words that Hasta pronrises
immediate acquirbment of one's object of desire through one's skill.
Mod.e of functionlnq :
Hasta is a Passive nakshatra. This comes as a surprise but this can be understood in terms of its
planetary ruler Moon. Moon has a strong, passive and receptive side to its nature, which is more on
dispfay in Hasta rather than Moon's other nakshatra, Rohini. Hasta's passivity can be seen through
the following example character :-
"Hasta can be a timid, shy pottery maker who just spends all his time making pottery items
without any desire for extraordinary gains. He gets paid much less than he deserves by cheating
businessmen (another type of Hasta character). He never raises a voice against the injustice and
accepts his fate of poverty and hard work lying down."
Caste :
It befongs to the Vaishya (merchant/business) caste. This comes as no surprise because Hasta
is predominantly associated with production, buying and selling of goods. It can be said that Hasta
has the most business like approach to life in comparison with all other nakshatras. In the present
day and age where business and cornmerce rules everything else, Hasta has a dominant role. However
since corruption, deceit and greed form the back bone of most business in todayb world, only the
negative side of Hasta is on display. All of the big, multinational corporations and the ruling business
elite are nothing but petty thieves and swindlers.

[page 198]
*:,=1
206
Qentrcr :
It is a Male nakhatra. This classification is directly derived from its ruling deity. We have
already seen that this is a predominantly s:lar nakshatra and thus has to have a male essence,
tsodyparts d 5{umor (Ayurvedic Constitution) :
Hands are the body parts related to this nakshatra.
It is a primarily "Vata" (airy) nakshatra. This is clear from the fact that all of this nakhatra lies
in a predominantly vata sign, Virgo. One can also infer that Hasta derives its quick, light, agile and
humourous disposition from its airy humor.
Direction :
It is related primarily to east, south, nodft and northwest.
{Podos (@nrters) :
The first pada or quafter of this asterism 10o 00' - 13"20' Virgo falls in Aries Navamsa and is
ruled by Mars. This pada gives abundant energy and makes one an expert at underhanded activities.
Mathematical, Military and Surgical skills are enhanced here. A well placed Mars or Sun are strongest
in this pada.
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 13" 20' - 16" 40' Virgo falls in Taurus Navamsa
ruled by Venus. The emphasis here is on down to eafth practicality. Planets here seek material
arrangement and perfection as tl6r dharma. Honesty and morality are more developed here in
comparison to other padas. This pada supports artistic activities. A well placed Mercury Venus and
Saturn give good results here.
31'

[page 199]
207
The third pada or quafter of this asterism 160 40' - 20" 00' Virgo falls in Gemini Navamsa ruled
by Mercury. This is the pada of the merchant, trader and business person. Emphasis here is on
cireer. This is the most dexterous and clever amongst Hasta's padas. Well placed Mercury here gives
extraordinary perception and intelligence.
The fourth pada or quafter of this asterism 20o 00' - 23" 20'Virgo falls in C:ncer Navamsa ruled
by Moon. The focus here is on family life and communal co-existence. This pada promises material
security but at the same time promotes suspicion towards anything foreign. The best and worst of
Hasta manifests through this pada. Only a well placed Jupiter gives strong results here especially in
regards to having good progeny.
lProfessbru :
Aftisans; Manual Labourers; All professions requiring dexterity of hand; Mechanics; Jewellery
makers; Origami Expefts; Acrobats, Gymnasts and Circus performers; Fairy Tale Writers; Those
involved in the inyention and production of daily utility items; Inventors in general; Publishing &
Printing Industry; Stage Magicians; Swindlers; Pickpockets; Stock Brokers; Packaging Industry; paper
Industry; Manicurists; All people working in share and stock markets; Casino dealers; Toy Makers;
Carpenters; Professional Gamblers; Bookies; Small Shop Owners, Market Sellers, Small Scale Trade
Persons, and Business men in allfields; Clerks; Bankers; Accountanb; Typists; Cleaners; Housekeepers;
Servants; Masseurs; Doctors; Physiotherapists; Chemical & Toiletry Industry; Textile industry; Tarot
Card Readers; Palmists; Psychics; Astrologers; Auctioneers; Pottery & Ceramic industry; Interior
decorators; Gardeners; Farmers & Agriculturalists; All professions connected with Food Production,
Processing and Distribution Industry; Barbers, Hairdressers & Stylists; Sculptors; Masons; Those
connected Wjth Amusement Parks; Sales Persons in all fields; Professional Comedians; Satirical
Novelists; Radio &Television Commentators; Speech Therapists; Newsreaders; MartialArtisb; Forgers;
Thieves; Robbers dealing with opening safes; All street smart professions in general.

[page 200]
208
lPfncu
Agricultural Fields; Grazing Pastures; Home Gardens; Art & Craft Studios; MarketPlace; Stock
Exchange (Wall Street etc.); Casinos; Betting Shops; Amusement parks; Fairgrounds; Factories; In
general, places connected with the above professions.
gurn'(ksence) and tattzua (Tlement) :
It is supposed to be a Rajasic nakshatra. Hasta's immense immersion in worldly activities
makes it a predominantly rajasic nakshatra. As we have mentioned repeatedly, it is a nakshatra very
active on a material plane.
It belongs to the Fire element. This classification definitely relates to its association with Sun.
Its fire energy manifests itself as innovation, quick thinking and an energetic approach to things.
a
gana Eypt) t
It is considered a Deva or godly nakshatra. Hasta's ruling deity Savitar is seen as a primarif
benevolent deity. Hasta's divine quality can be judged from the fact that it never harbours any strong
negative or cruei tendencies.
Oricntation an[ Disposition :
It is a Level nakshatra. This has to do with the business aspect of Hasta. Most level nakshatras
are supposed to be good for business of all kinds. They are also good for patching things up, an
activity which Hasta greatly enjoys.
As mentionerJ previously, it is a Light and Swift nakshatra. This classification can be easily
derived from its humourous, lighthearted nature. We have also seen that Hasta is associated with
quickness in thought and action.

[page 201]
209
Lunat Montfr d Datl :
It relates to the first 9 days of the lunar month of Chaitu, whidr uzually falls in late March.
Hasta is also related to the Dvadashi ( 12th tifti or day) of the waxing and waning phases of the
moon's monthly cycle.
Auspirions Actiaitits :
Good for most activities done under the Sun; Arts & Crafts; Activities that stimulate laughter;
All types of hobbies especially things like pottery and jewellery making; Planting seeds & C,ardening
in general; Domestic Work; Studying sciences & Astrology; Leaming Languages; All activities requiring
handskills and repetition; Magic Tricks; Playing games; All business activities requiring tact &
shrewdness; Good for marriage; Buying & Selling, especially items like grains, textiles etc.; Good for
getting a good bargain; Dealing with children; Thievery; Holistic treatments of diseases; Travel &
Change of Residence
Inauspicions Actiaitirs :
Planning longterm goals and objectives; SexualActivity; Does notsupport Relaxation or Inactivity;
Unfavourable for all activities requiring executive ability and maturity; Not good for most nighttime
activities.
Qfanetary fotfer :
The main planetary influences affecting this nakshatra are Moon and Mercury. Moon is the main
ruling planet of Hasta. Moon imparts emotions, care and sensitivity to this nakshatra. It is this lunar
influence which makes Hasta a doyen of home and family life. When working through its lower
functioning, all the negative aspects of lunar energy like ultra conservatism, bigotry fickleness,
excessive attachment and inability to let go takes centre stage. However unlike C-ancer, the lunar

[page 202]
210
nature here is under superuision of Mercury the planet of discrimination. Mercuryb influence makes
Hasta jovial and lighthearted thus saving it from the type of depression people with prominent
Cancer placements go through. Hasta's discriminatory power also allows it to navigate its way through
the waters of life more efficienUy as compared to ib nakshatra's counterpaft in Cancer, Ashlesha.
Ashlesha and Hasta are the only two nakshatras where the energies of Moon and Mercury
combine, the only difference being that Moon is the king in Ashlesha, while Mercury has the flnal say
in Hasta. This means that intellect rules over the mind in Hasta, which is obviously the way universe
prefers it. Moon can perceive but not derive conclusions, which is Mercury's doing, It is Mercury
which guides the Moon while it is Moon which nuftures Mercury. Hasta is all about this interplay
between Moon and Mercury.
ilowefs and Afpfiabe* :
The first pada or quafter of this asterism 10o 00' -13o 20' Virgo corresponds to "Pu" as in Putin
or Pure.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 13o 20' : 160 40' Virgo corresponds to "Sha" as in
Shah or Sharon.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 16" 40' - 20o 00' Virgo corresponds to "Nu" as in Nun.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 20o 00' - 23o 20'Virgo corresponds to "Tu" as in
Tuftle.
In the Sanskrit alphabet Hasta corresponds to "Jha" and "Nya" consequently its mantras are
"Om Jham" and ]Om Nyam".

[page 203]
211
Serent type an[ Compati1i[ity :
Its sexual animal is a Buffalo. Despite its dexterity and skill with hands and fingers, its sexual
tendencies are usually not very refined. A lot of sexual exploitation takes place for making money
under the energies of this nakshatra. It is however not prone to extreme sexual perversions like
other cruel or fierce nakshatras. When it is working through its ascetk level, Hasta can be the most
non-sexual amongst all nakshatras. Its sexual energies are most compatible with those of Swati.
For sexual and marital compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the tables on pages
457 & 458 .
Esoteric:
Hasta is the handyman of the Universe and even esoteric things are nothing but exoteric when
one truly understands the dictum - "As Above, So Below"
Hasta takes care of all the little things which keep the foufteen worlds running. 'The divide
between the devil and god is a matter of detail" sums up Hastab approach on a macrocosmic level.
Its painstaking efforts are however often overlooked on a personal as well as collective level, but
such things don't bother it just like it doesn't bother Sun if its light is taken for granted.
Though this fact has not been brought up in any written text until now, Hasta has a connection
with Rahu, the planet of Maya, magic and trickery. Hasta is partly the secret behind the deviously
mischievous all-knowing smile on the face of Vishnu. Hasta is one of the few nakshatras which has
the ability to see the whole of creation as a play and find enjoyment, merriment and laughter playing
it the right way.
The legend of Virgin Mary which obviously finds its parallels in all ancient cultures and civilizations,
is all about the energies which come under Hasta's domain. Hasta is representative of the inner Sun
which has the ability to hold, produce and foster the divine saviour (mainly incarnations of Vishnu).
The term 'inner Sun' is used because Virgo is the sign of matter and the material world holds and

[page 204]
212
hides the spiritual realm. Hasta therefore is the androgynous force which shapes the material world
according to spiritual laws.
Being the 13h nakshatra, 13 is the number which Hasta relates to. It is common knowledge
that 13 is a peculiar number associated with the occult, endings, death, regeneration etc. The
concept of order and renewal inherent in Hasta can be understood best through its peculiar quality,
which relates to the connections of events separated by time. For example, many things which
happen to us in childhood are for a specific reason, which we only come to know about much later
in life in our adulthood. For evolved souls, most events which happen in their childhood are silentf
building up a foundation and preparing for their purpose and destiny. It is usually very hard to
understand the significance of these little, seemingly, meaningless, disconnected events until much
later. It is within this phenomenon that the secret functioning of the number 13 and Hasba lies. The
fuok of Solomon states emphaUcally - 'The one who understands the number 13, shall have power
and dominion".
Qotra (Ce{zstiat Ltueage) :
This nakshatm is related to the Sage Pulahu, one of the seven celestial sages looking after the
affairs of our galary. The name of this sage trandates into "connector of space". We can imagine
that connecting space must be quite a detaibd oriented job. It is also interesting to note that it is
time which is the connector of space. Hasta as we have seen is directly connected with the passage
of time, through its potter wheel symbolism. '
xgnu{iaI:
One can strengthen this nakshatra's good qualities by worshipping the Sun as a creative force,
at sunrise. All the remedial measures normally associated with the Sun can be applied to this nakshatra
(See authort previous work - "Suy The Cosmt? Powerhouse", SagarPubli@tions, India)'

[page 205]
213
1
Worship of Wshnu or any of Vishnu's incarnations is a way of getting in touch with the higher
energies of this nakshatra. Repetition of the root mantras of this nakshatra - "Om Jham" and "Om
Nyam" 108 times when Moon transits this nakshatra and in its corresponding lunar month is sure to
reduce suffering and bring enlightenment into a person's life.
Persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this nakshatra can also increase the
good effects thniugh the above mentioned ways. It is helpful for them to wear all lighter shades
especially green. White is also good. Avoid bright shades. They should use its directions, lunar
month and the days when Moon transits Hasta to undertake all important actims.
Eaantp{e:
Vivekananda, the famous Indian saint, who made waves in the west by introducingthe Vedanta
philosophy, has his Moon placed in Hasta in the 10th house. This placement definitely made him
crafty with his speech. He combined wit humour and sarcasm to enthrall audiences across America
and Europe. Back in India, he preached a very Hasta doctrine of working hard on a material level.
Misce[faneous :
According to Varahamihira, "Moon in Hasta makes one energetic, daring, merciless, a drunkard
and a thief". It is true that some of these qualities don't apply to our exalted example, but one can
find they hold ground in a lot of nativities.
***

[page 206]
t+. (hit ^ lr'zo'Yirg. - 6"1c,libra

[page 207]
L4.
Cfiitro
(23020'Virgo - 6040' Libra)
In tfu Sky t
Chitra is one of the few asterisms which are represented by a single star. Its star is commonly
known as Spia (Alpha-Virginis), which lies in the lower back part of the constellation Virgo. It can
be said to be placed around the region where the 'hips of the maiden'formed by the shape of the
constellation Virgo would lie. It is one of the brightest stars in the night sky with a visual magnitude
of 1.06 and can be spotted even in the polluted skies over big metropolitan cities. Ancient vedic
seers s;:rw this star ai Ure re;iOence 6 Vffiwal<anm (or Tuashh), the divine arclritecL
A{ntu :
Chitra conveys a wide variety of meanings in English ranging from "Glittering", "Brilliant", "Bright',
uAttu, uArtftJl", "Beautiful", "Many Coloured", "Variegated", "Illusory", "Visually Exciting" or "Magic".
In a way this nakshatra conveys more of its inherent qualities through its name than any other
asterism.
Sym6o[ :
In keeping with its name, its main symbol is a 'big, bright, shining jewel'. Gemstones, as we
know, are formed under conditions of intense heat and pressure acting over rocks and minerals for
millions of years. On a material plane, the universe has to come a long way from the initial big bang

[page 208]
218
I
to the stage where gems are produced on planets such as ours. A gem can thus be seen to be the
apex of the universe's striving for beauty and perfection of form'
We have already seen that Hasta, the previous nakshatra, is related to aftisans and those
involved in light crafu like handicrafts. In Chitra, however, crafts are taken to another level and
perfection of form is achieved. Chitra is therefore associated with the final appearance and form of
werything in.nature. Its ruling deity as we shall learn, was even responsible for giving our Sun its
final present day form (refer to image). It is up to Chitra to finally oversee how a thing should look,
whether it be a galaxy or a small leaf.
Its alternative symbol is a 'pearl'. Pearls, as we know, are formed in an oyster's moments of
initation, in much the same way aft comes out of the aftist's moments of irritation and depression.
Chitra is thus related to the mysterious essence behind creativity, using its clear understanding of
the laws of the universe. It has the ability to fashion new, wonderful and delighfful things out of
seemingly nothing at all. In its higher aspect, Chitra allows one to see beyond the illusion of form,
thus giving access to the pearl of true knowledge.
Deity :
Tvastar, the celestial architect, is the main ruling deity of this asterism. He is usually referred to
by the name Vishwakarma (creation worker) in most of the Vedic texts. He is said to be an adept in
Maya, the illusory force which keeps alive the drama of life. Vishwakarma uses his knowledge of
Maya to create, mutate and fashion new forms out of the pre-existing ones, an act which seems like
magic to others. His workings are often done in secret and a shroud of mystery surrounds his
character and persona. To understand his mysterious aspect better, we have to take our present day
example; "most of the human population on our planet are completely unaware of how normal soil
containing silicon is fashioned into a computer, a device which has the ability to do all these magic-
like functions".

[page 209]
219
In the same way, most of the gods and other celestial beings do not have a clue as to how
Vishwakarma creates magnificent structures using the most basic elements. Even on our planet we
can see that the most impoftant thing defining a civilization is its architecture. There's none better
than Vishwakarma in material architecture and consequently none surpasses Chitra as far as afts,
oafts, design, architecture, beauty and proportion are concerned. Chitra is the grand illusion maker
creating delightful things, forms and objects, which make us want to live.
Vishwakarma, even though he is friendly to the gods, has no particular allegiance to anyone.
He creates all lokas (planes of existence) for all races (human, godly, demonic, serpent etc. ). It is
Vishwakarma who fashions thunderbolts for Indra, the king of the heavenly hosts, but his twin
brother Trishiras (three-headed) is a demon aM an enemy of Indra. This duality finds expression
through Chitra, a nakshatra which is very ambiguous and thus hard to classiff in any fixed category
of good, evil, crooked or saintly.
Like Vishwakarma, Chitra creates without a care for the far reaching implications of what it is
creating. It was the palace, which Vishwakarma built for the Pandauas (refer to Vedic legend "Zle
Mahabharata ), which in a way led to the final great war, commonly known as Mahabharata. Even in
the present day and age, all kinds of new weapons of war are fashioned everyday by scientists,
technicians and engineers. They however can't be held responsible for the way these weapons are
used by politicians and the ruling elite.
dature U functinning :
The essence of Chitn can be summarized in the phrase "create, create and create". Chitra is a
dynamic, energetic nakshatra which has very little ability to sit still. It likes to involve ibelf in one
creative activity or another. When this creativity is in harmony with universal functionings all goes
well for Chitra natives. However when this is not the case, Chitra natives can become unbalanced,
selfish, indulgent creatures. /

[page 210]
220
/Cnitra natives are obssessed with appearance,r/complexity, structure and form. Therefore this
a*
I ngkshatra has to do ryggry lllustonlnd glamour. Chitra approaches things from an architectural,
\-----
aesthetic mint of view. There are different levels of maya. It can operate on the superficial extemal
<_
levels like a desire to project outer beauty, and in one's need to create harmony and balance in
relationships with others. On both mundane or spiritual levels the point here is that Chitra natives
can leam to play with universal energies and utilise ircs complex layers of perception and projection'
It is due to this aspect that natives influejnced by this nakshatra never reveal themselves in social
situations. They are always projecting a front of some kind. Usually this is a dignified front with a
hidden quality.
The Virgo part of Chitra has more core understanding of maya than the Libra paft. The Libra
t, while icate
detailed working of things. The Libra part of Chitra is more relationship oriented. Chifa loves admiration
---..-.-..-.--..
and is motivated by that in whatever it d . Chitra
---
Sun's in the signT
lnJalwavs has an element of doubt and.
of Libra. Therefore its qualities and its needs to focus on structure and appreciation of form are
motivated by this inherent doubt and uncertainty.
Chitra's love for understanding how things work and how all the patts fit together, generally
place natives under its influence in scientific, technological and artistic fields. Japanese as a race are
governed by this nakshatra, which can easi! be seen in their technological obssession and their
attention to detail. Chitra loves to create "magic". The Virgo part of Chitra will create the lechnological
gadget and the Libra part will give it an outer form or garmg$to the aesthetic appeal. On a
higher plane it is the Virgo part of Chitra which is more sincere in trying to understand the inner
workings of the unive69, whereas the Libra part can tend to keep one trapped in the maya aspect
nther than qoins beyandjt.
f- suallY have well-ProPortioned
I nairt"o bodies (if they have hair they are constantly pruning it), bright lusturous eyes, thin eyebrows
I
/ and alluring mannerisms. They always have a glint in their eyes. They are bom with a natural ability
t'
t

[page 211]
221
todazz|e.Chitranativeshaveaverystrongabilityto-@Theyareusua||y
passionate but also have the ability to fake passions when the situation demands it. They hold
themselves with a ceftain OgrTgglgIty which covers up their weaknesses. Chitra naUves alwap
make a special effort to come across as completely together type of individuals. Since all of them are
not af l together especially in the present Age of lGli, most of this effort is pretension.
|ower|eve|.:,,tlircffiitationtoproduceapear|,thereisacertainamountof
pain involved in stripping away the layers of illusion and going beyond maya. Again this pain only
operates on the egoic plane, which itself is an expression of ma1a.
Modc of functionitrg :
Chitra is considered to be an Active nakshatra. This does not come as a surprise, as Chitra's
/,main motto is to simply "create, create and create". It i/hyperactive and indefatigableft constantly
moves from one creative project to the next. In its positive aspect, this quality makes it hardworking
.'7
and efficient,
'gi*"-9l
Caste :
It belongs to the Farmer caste. Even Vishwakarma, the divine architect, is in a way nothing but
a "producer", in keeping with the wishes of the gods, or whosoever he is working for at any given
point in time. The ancient seers obviously regarded creating and producing things, especially on a
material plane, as a working class activity. In modern times, sculptures and architects are elevated
to lofty positions in society, but in essence, they still remain puppets in the hands of the ruling elite
who finance them.
-.-_______-- |Chitra can cause one a lot of frustration and angst,[rhether it is functioning from a higher or x

[page 212]
222
Qen[er :
It ls a Female nakshatra. Through this classification the ancient seers are hinting at Chitra's
strong connection with maya, the feminine attribute of nature, which sustains the play of life. It can
be seen that Chitra natives possess predominant!_&ninirc 9reces'
tsodyparts 6 ,fi"Ltnor (Ayurvedic Constitution ) :
Forehead and Neck are the body parts related to this nakshatra.
It is a primarily "Pitta'(fiery) nakshatra. This is clear from its relationship with Mars, a primarily
pitta planet. C d energy producing processes in the
body.
Directbn :
It is related primari[ to the range or arc that goes from south east, to south, to west.
eatr"as (Qnrters) :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 23" 20' - 260 40'Virgo, falls in Leo Navamsa ruled by
Sun. On a lower level, the emphasis here is on personal glamour, whib on a higher level this pada
strives for self perfection through self abnegation. This pada has a very strong ability to keep secrets,
just f ike the sphinx (an ancient monument which is a combination of the signs Leo and Virgo) hides
deep esoteric knowledge until humanity is ready for them. Planets here function in a very hidden
non-apparent way. Sun, Mars, Mercury and Rahu are especially strong here'
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 260 40' - 30" 00'Virgo falls in Virgo Navamsa ruled
by Mercury. The emphasis here is on order, arrangement, maternity and duality. This is a very
disciplined pada which likes to conclude whatever it begins. Saturn, Mercury and Rahu are strong
here, although Saturn may make one excessively puritanical if working through its lower aspect.

[page 213]
223
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 00o 00' - 3o 20' Libra falls in Libra Navamsa ruled by
Venus. On the material plane, the main focus of this pada is on relationships, self-absorption and
equilibrium. This is a very self-centric and at the same time social pada, which likes to rise in life
through manipulating its socialcircle. On a higher level it likes to promote love and harmony, especially
in relationships. Planets here like to flaunt and dazzle. Mercury Venus & Saturn are especially strong
in this pada.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 30 20' - 60 40' Libra falls in Scorpio Navamsa ruled
by Mars. This pada relates to the magical and mysterious side of Chitra. More passion and secrecy is
in display than what is usually associated with the sign Libra. Despite its non-acquisitive nature,
planets here usually bring smooth sailing in regards to material affairs. Venus, Saturn, Rahu & Ketu
give strong results here.
grofessiotu :
All types of Craftsmen and Artisans; Sculptors; Architects; Designers; Fashion Designers; Models;
Fashion Industry; Cosmetic Industry; Plastic surgeons; Surgeons in General; Photographers; Graphic
Artists; Composers; Orators, Comperes and Broadcasters; All professions requiring special abilities
and versality; Business Experts; Interior Designers; Jewellery makers; Vaastu/Fengshui Experts; All
professions involving invention and production of all kinds of machinery; Builders of all kinds;
Landscapers; Painters; Screenplay writers; Novelists; Production and Set designers; Art Directors;
Those associated with Theatre or Theatre groups; Stage Managers; Performers of all kinds; Jazz
Musicians; Musicians with an original and out of ordinary approach; Herbologists; Advertising Industry.
lP[oces :
Capital Cities; Phces of Architectural Importance like "Taj Mahal", "Eiffel Tower", "Empire StaE
Building" etc.; Stages, Pedormance Halls and Theatres; Places frequented by artisans, merchants,
consumers and women; Markets; Trade shows; Wardrobes, Closets; All places connected to the
above professions.

[page 214]
224
Qma ('F-ssence) anf Tattraa (Ekment) :
It is supposed to be a Tamasic nakshatra. All illusions and delusions are classified under the
Tamas aspect of nature. Thus the master of illusion itself would have to be seen in a tamasic light.
From the perspective of the universal mind, creating just for the sake of creating does not reflect a
very enlightened state of mind.
It belongs to the Fire element. This is directly derivable from its strong association with Mars. It
is after all fire which creates a shining jewel out of plain rocks. The fire element directly relates to the
creative principle in nature.
Qano $ype) :
It is considered a rakhas or demonic nakshatra. In all the puranic mythologies, the demons
are seen as superior to gods and humans when it comes to manipulation of maya, creating illusions
or fashioning structures and weapons. The ancient seers are highlighting the indulgent aspect of
Chitra through this classification.
Oricntation U Dispositbn :
It is a Level nakshatra. This relates to the balancing aspect of this asterism. Any pefection of
beauty or form requires a sense of harmony, balance and proportion. Chittu it un ubtolurc il
,creating beauty through balance and harmony
It is a Soft, Mild and Tender nakshatra. This comes as a surprise considering its martial element.
In Chitra, the maftian energy is used for constructive purposes rather than confrontation and
destruction. We can see that half of Chitra lies in Libra, a mild, diplomatic sign. Its other half lies in
Virgo, another non-violent sign.

[page 215]
225
Lunar Montfr U Day :
-:-: 
It relates to the middle 9 days of the lunar month of Chaitra, which usually falls in April.
Chitra is also related to the Dvitiya (2no Uthi or day) of the waxing and waning phases of the
Moon's monthly cycle.
Arupiriotu Actititirs j
. Health & body improvement measures; Buying new clothes and wearing them; Fixing up the
home; Home designing; Any activity related to Arts & Crafts, Creative Activity in General; Any type
of mechanical activities; Good for giving performances; Putting on gemstones and jewellery for the
first time; Decorative Activities; Good for spiritual practices like visualizations; All issues relating to
the opposite sex; Good for collecting herbs and preparing medicines; Good for all activities requiring
charisma, elegance & personal charm.
' Inauspicious Actiztitizs :
Unfavourable for direct confrontation; Marriage; Unfavounble for activities which require getting
to the root of things; Bad for investigative activities as illusions are strong.
etanetary fu.fer :
Mars is the main planetary ruler of this nakshatra. Mars is the energy requircd to fashion things
the way we want them to. It would suffice to say that Mars is the powerhouse which runs Chitrat
factory. The martian energy doesn't express itself in its natural confrontational way through Chitn
as it is sublimated by Venus, the secondary ruler of this asterism. Venus is often regarded as the
souler opposite of Mars. This view is only partially conect as Mars & Venus are complimentary to
each other more than anything else. Together they are responsible for the reproductive process in
nature. This gives us a clue as to where Chitra's creativity originates from. Venub refines the raw

[page 216]
226
maftian impulses. Chitra can thus be seen as the refinement-meter of the soul. Mars-Venus together
plomote sexuality, making Chitra one of the most sexually alluring atras.
Mercurycomesintop|ayinthefirstha|fofChitrawhichfa|tsinVirgo'@
besides promoting technical skills, promotes skills relaUng to speech and words. l4ercury.uses Mars
energy to go into the exacting details of nature's functionings. There is a Rahu element to this part
of the zodiac which makes it more complicated than it looks on the suface. It is obvious that
nature's secrets cannot be unravelled without Rahu's help. Mercury and Rahu always form a team
when it comes to understanding maya (the universal play).
Mars/Venus, Mars/Mercury Mars/Mercury/Venus and Mars/Mercury/Rahu conjunctions carry
an energy similar to that of Chitra./Mars, Mercury Satutn & Rahu are especi4ly-$rolg.ilge-Yirgo
part of Cnitta ./
z-'r
'/owe[s anf AIpfiabets :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 23o 20' -260 40'Virgo conesponG to "Pe" as in Page.
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 26o 40' - 30o 00' Virgo conesponds to "Po" as in
Police.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 00o 00' - 3o 20' Ubra corresponds to "Ra" as in Rama.
The foufth pada or quarter of this asterism 3o 20' - 6o 40' Libra corresponds to "Re" as in Ray.
In the Sanskrit alphabet Chitra corresponds to "Ta" and "Tha" consequently its mantras are
"Om Tam" and "Om Tham",

[page 217]
227
Serya['Iype and Conpatihitity :
Its sexual animal is a Tiger. This points towards an aggressive and dominant attitude in sexual
activities. Chitra however has a secrecy element attached to its sexual expression. It puts up a highly
sexed or totally rrcn-sexual image with equal ease, when the truth is always somewhere in between.
For sexual & marital compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the tables on pages 457
& 458.
Esoteric :
Chitra is the architect of the Universe and thus relates closely to Brahma, the creator among
the.holy trinity. In fact Vishwakarma, the ruling deity of Chitra, is one of Brahma's direct mind-bom
sons. Chitra conceals within itself the laws and arrangement of the Universe on all planes of o<istence.
The fact that it connects the signs Virgo and Libra reveals that Chitra is the bridge between
compassion and harmony. Even though compassion is one of the divine viftues, it is often forgotten
that only a proper use of compassion brings about balance, understanding and harmony.
The number 14, which is the number of Chitra in the sequence of Nakshatras, has simibr
connotations in occult numerology. It is related to the 'Temperance" card in Tarot imagery. The
symbolism there depicG a winged angel mixing two heavenly fluids with one foot in water and one
on dry land. Chitra has been assigned this delicate and precarious job of balancing seemingly opposing
factions within the pool of universal constituents.
In the universal scheme of things, Chitra relates to "punya chayani shakti" - the power to
accumulate merit. Its symbolism has truth below and law above. Chitra gains honour and rnerit
through its hard work done in consonance with universal laws.

[page 218]
228
Q otra (Cetts tiat Lineag e)
This nakshatra is related to the Sage Kratu, one of the seven celestial sages looking after the
affairs of our galaxy. The name of this sage translates into "the inspirer". It is appropriate that a
creative and inspiring sage should preside over the most creative among the asterisms
\gmo{iat
Worship of feminine deities who ride a tiger like Durga, Bhauani, Jagdamba etc. is the best way
of getting the best out of Chitra. On a higher level, worship cf these deities helps us see through the
illusions of maya, an important step on the road to enlightenment.
Repetition of the root mantras of this nakshatra - "Om Tam" and "Om Tham" 108 times when
Moon bansits this nakshafa and in the conesponding lunar month of Chaitra is sure to reduce
suffering and bring enlightenment into a person's life.
Persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this nakshatra can also increase the
good effects through the above mentioned ways. It is helpful for them to wear all sparkly, bright
variegated and glittering colours. They should use its directions, lunar month and the days when
Moon transits Chaitra to undertake all impoftant actions.
Tampfz:
Anna Nicole Smith, the famous model who inherited a foftune from her 90 year old billionaire
husband, has her Moon placed in Chitra. Her huge body is very representative of Chitrat love of
large, well built and proportionate structures. The life of Anna Nicole Smith has been all about
dazzling and casting illusions.
Mahatma Gandhi, the famous Indian political crusader, was born with Chitra rising on his
Ascendant. His life and works reveal the energetic, indefatigable aspect of Chitra. In keeping with

[page 219]
229
Chitra's natural tendency, he was a highly sexed person in private life, despite having an almost
sexless saintly public persona.
Misce[laneous :
According to Varahamihira, those w$_U@Jhitra are found wear d
g:t|."d., *ith b".r These meanings more or less sum up our Moon in Chitra
o<ample, Anna Nicole Smith.
***

[page 220]
s
"T
*
d-##"
:s#x
t 5. $wati 6"+c,libr" - zo"oo,libr^

[page 221]
15.
Suoti
(6040' Libra - 20o00' Libra)
In tfu SkU t
Swati is once again among the few asterisms which are represented by a single star. Its
representative is a yellowish star commonly known as Arcturus (Alpha-Bootis).It is the central star
of the constellation of Bootiswhich can be said to lie on top of the gateway formed between Virgo
and Libra. However, as we can see, this asterism occupies the heart of the sign Libra and has nothing
to do with the sign Virgo. With a visual magnitude of 0.16, Arcturus is the third brightest among the
stars in the night sky and can be spotted even in the polluted skies over big metropolitan cities.
Ancient Vedic seers associated a lot of importance to this bright star and saw it as the abode of
hnswati, the goddess of learning.
AS.me :
"Swati", like other sanskrit terms, evokes a wide variety of English meanings - "self-going",
"good goer", "independent", "sword", "self -blowing", "delicate" and "tender". Each of these meanings
relay a different side of this asterism's nature and functionings.

[page 222]
234
Sym6o[ :
Its symbol is a'young plant shoot blown by the wind'. The wind symbolism suggests the airy
quality of this asterism which promotes pgstlessness, adaptability, dexteritv and a roaming disposition.
The young plant symbolism suggests delicacy. This is the reason why this asterism +Ive9.&tstgngth
and independence, just like a young plant shoot strives fqf matqty. Air is the balancing element
among the five interacting elements in nature. This nakshatra is the balancing pivot of the zodiac in
the sense that it is the middle most nakshatra, with thifteen nakshatras on either side. It represents
the atmospheric aspect, where there's neither a lull nor a storm and a gentle breeze is blowing.
Swati thus represents the period of our lives where smoodt sailing takes place.
In ancient Vedic texts, wind also suggests an idea of force and ability to move things, like
clouds. This implies that even though gentle, SwaU is capable of applying force whenever required.
The young delicate sapling is always growing to become a strong sturdy tree, which has very little to
fear from nature's pressures like weather and animals.
A'coral' is the alernative symbol of this nakshatra. The coral is a plant which makes its progeny
out of its own body like bacterias and other micro-organisms. In the same way, Sg1li's qgqllyity
comes out of parting with a piece of itself. It is common knowledge that coral relates to the planet
Mars. SwaU has no direct correlation with the planet Mars, but through coral a connection is eStablished'
Just like wind gets the impetus to move through the imbalance between heat and cold, Swati gets its
extraordinary mobility, energy and strength from the heating effect of the planet Mars.
Swati falls in the cardinal, achievement-oriented sign of Libra. This is whY'a sword'is also seen
as a symbol of this nakshatra, to represent its$ng,_nry jualV In a way, it can be said, that in
time this asterism transforms from the delicate young plant shoot into a hard and strong, razor sharp
sword. Thus those with prominent Swati in their charts are late bloomers and have a stronger
second half of life as compared to the first half.

[page 223]
235
Deity :
Its main presiding deity is Vayu, the god of wind. He is one of the five main gods residing in
fuuarga (heavenly astral plane), who are responsible for taking care of the five main elements of
nature - earth, wind, fire, water & ether. All of Vayu's qualities, especially those relevant to the
earthly plane, can be seen manifusted through Hanuman,son of Vayu and one of the cental characters
in the Vedic epic, "Ramayana", Hanuman's qualities like erffeme stength, morality, stong sense of
ethics, moderation, fairness, resourcefulness, intelligence, wisdom, sense of propriety, loyalty and
ability to serye without letting ego come in the way; apply to the highest aspect of Swati,s functioning.
The "Ramayana" tells us that Hanuman was never consciously aware of his own prowess unless
reminded of it by others. Swati, in the same way, is quite humble in its disposition and needs to be
told about its potential for it to be abte to express itself. This quality can be associated with its
planetary ruler Rahu' Rahu as a planet represents the potential that is hidden from us, which we
need to discover in the present life.
It is Hanuman's extreme loyalty and devotion to Rama (main character from the "Ramayana',),
which still remains the strongest example of unconditional and unselfish service in the heafts and
minds of people influenced by the Vedic way of thinking. It is no wonder then that the planet of
service, Saturn, reaches maximum exaltation in Swati. Bhema, one of the central characters in the
Mahabharata is also a nn of Vap (one must remember that in those days gods were still copulating
with humans). He is a character simihr to that of Hanuman, except that his qualities were not as
sterling as that of Hanuman. This is however to be expected as the ages had changed frqn Treta
(Silver) to Dwapar (Bronze).
Swati's relation to gnswati, the goddess of music and learning, reveals the higher nature of
this asterism, which is conducive for all sorts of learning - material, philosophical or spiritual. Just
like its planetary ruler Rahu, when functioning through its higher aspect, this nakshatra is eager and
open to learning - a rare quality.

[page 224]
236
Afaane d functbnlng :
"Balance" is the keyword for natives born under the strong influence of this nakshatra. Balance
is a double edged sword and many Swati types are seen to avoid taking any stance on any matter
due to their extreme need to maintain harmony. Only very evolved Swati types are capable of
decisive action. Extreme procrastination is one of the worst traits of this nakshatra' Inconclusive
thinking is a feature which is apparent here more than any other nakshatra. Swati's openness to new
thoughts and ideas make it ideal for all types of learning, but only a few acquire mastery over their
chosen field.
In its lower aspect, Swati is the most airy fairy amongst the nakshatras. Swati natives always
have to be conscious of growing towards a more stable centre and still this process usually takes a
long time. Swati is usually in no hurry to achieve its objectives and this is the reason why Saturn
finds maximum exaltation here. The emphasis here is on longterm planning. Most Swati natives are
usually very good at sowing the seeds for the future, but only a few of them stick around to nurture
the seed into a full grown tree.
Swati natives usually have slim and elegantly proportioned bodies. They can be easily spotted
in group situations with a continuously fixed smile on their faces. Because of the emphasis of Venus
and Rahu, Swati natives are born diplomats. They are the socialites of the zodiac. They usually go to
any lengths to ft into prevalent social and cultural structures. They are strong advocates of social
etiquettes, courtesies and civilized behaviour. They use their social charm to climb the ladder of
success. Their catchphrase is "Who am I to blow against the wind?". It is this quality which makes
them lose their inner centre and blindly follow mass trends. Often very intelligent Swati types behave
in the same way, even after attaining a clear understanding of the worthlessness of trying to please
everyone all the time.
.Swati'translates into'independent'or'self-going'. These meanings are self explanatory as this
asterism promotes individuality. However this individuality is different from the individuality fufthered
by Sun's influence, as Sun has its maximum debilitation in this asterism. It is not a soul level

[page 225]
237
individuality, but a more mental and material individuality based upon some skill or talent developed
on these planes.
Many of the world's richest men are born with either Moon or other significant planets placed in
this asterism. Working through its lower plane, this asterism can be oveftly indulgent and function
without any regard for morals. Law, sex and money - the thre major Libran significaUons, form an
integral part of the activiUes of this asterism.
Mod"e of futrctionhg :
It is supposed to be a Passive nakshatra. This obviously relates to its naturally shy and gentle
quality. Swati is more of a "wait and watch" rather than a "run and get it" type of nakshatra. As we
have already discussed, it is a patient energy, which is ready to wait for things to fall into place
together, rather than aggressively put them in place itself.
Caste i
It belongs to the Butcher caste. It is hard to visualize what the ancient seers were trying to
convey through this classification. In our opinion it must relate to the destructive and ruthless side
of Swati. Even wind can be a highly destructive and unforgiving force when it takes the form of
tempest, cyclones and tornadoes. Swati, as we have discussed earlier, is quite ruthless in its approach,
especially when it gains strength and power over the passage of time.
Qendtr :
It is a Female nakshatra. Swati represents the female aspect of its planetary ruler, Rahu. It is
directly associated with Saraswati, goddess of music and learning.

[page 226]
238
Bodypmts d lfutnor (fuunte[ic Cotutitution) :
The body part it relates to is the Chest, which emphasizes its connection with the air element
and the process of breathing. On an astral level this is related to the flow of prana (life force)
through the body.
Its constitutional type is "l(apha" (watery). This classification stems from the fact that all of this
nakshaha lies in the predominantly kapha sign of Libra.
Direction :
It is onnected with tfre west, southwest and the southeast
eadas (Qnrters) :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 6o 40' - 10o 00' Libra falls in Sagittarius Navamsa and
is ruled by Jupiter. This pada epitomises the restless and inquisitive aspect of Swati. It gives talent in
writing, communications and promotes all kinds of travel. All planets give reasonably favourable
results in this pada because of its eager and openminded nature.
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 10o 00' - 13o 20' Libra falls in Capricorn Navamsa
and is ruled by Saturn. This pada embodies the material aspect of Swati's functioning. It is the most
rooted among the four padas and thus to an extent lacks Swati's inherent ftagility. The concerns
here are stability and material growth. It can be deemed as selfish when it comes to personal
comforts and other forms of materiality. Planets here give a sound business sense.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 13o 20' - 160 40' Libra falls in Aquarius Navamsa ruled
by Satum. This is the most intellectual amongst the four padas of Swati. The emphasis here is on
learning, creativity and cooperation. Planets here encourage any kind of group work in order to
achieve oneb drosen goals. Mercury Venus and SaUm are especially strong in this pada.

[page 227]
239
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 160 40' - 20o 00' Libn falls in Pisces Nawmsa ruled
by Jupiter. This is the most flexible and adaptable amongst Swati's padas. We have already seen that
Swati's key to success lies in blowing with the wind and this pada is best suited for that. Being the
Pushkara navamsa pada, it promises success through hardwork, ingenuity, flexibility and sociability.
Planets here might seem flimsy in their approach but are service orientated and hardworking. All
planets except.Mercury give good results here. 
rr
Qrofusiotu :
Businessmen and Tradespeople of all types; Wrestlers; All spotu, especially those relying on
breath control; Singers; Musicians playing Wind Instruments like Horns & Organ; Researchers;
Inventors; Technology experts; Independent Enterprises; Govemment related Service professions;
Aeronautical Industry; Pilots; Professions connected with the Aviation industry; Transportation
Industry; Socialites; Professions involving use of speech like Newsreader etc.; Computer & Softrruare
Industry; Professions requiring flexibility & quick ingenuity; Serving Professions like Housekeepers &
Right-hand-man types; Kite Makers; Adventure Sports people like Skydivers, Balloonists etc.;
Educators, Teachers; Lawyers; Judges; Politicians; Trade-Union & Working Class Leaders; Diplomats,
Hosts, Hostesses.
lPlaces :
High Clifb; Places where winds blow strongly; Agricultural land; Coral reefs; Marketplaces;
Business C-enters; Banks; Flnancial Institutions; Sport Complexes; Airports (both civil & military);
Educational institutions; Aeronautical facilities & testing grounds; Computer & Softnvare related
cenbes; Research facilities of alltypes; DiplomaUc enclaves like Embassies, Consulates etc; parliament
Houses; courthouses; commuter places like Train stations, Bus-Stations etc.

[page 228]
240
guna ('Essence) anl Tattwa (Efcment) :
Rahu's Venusian side is usually quite materialistic which makes this asterism Raiasic(materially
active). It is the best nakshatra for business and other financially profitable activities, as it always
keeps its own interesb above everything else.
It belongs to the Fire Element. The fact that it is fiery reveals a hitherto unknown aspect of
Rahu, which is predominantly an airy and earthy planet. This fieriness relates to the inherent motiwtion
of this asterism, which can range from learning, to acquiring financial gain, to getting woddly
prominence,
Qana EWd t
It is considerd a Deua or godly nakshatra. Its godly nature stems from the fact that this
asterism is very conducive to all types of learning. Rahu, its ruler, is the significator of knowledge
and this aspect of its nature finds expression through this nakshatra
Orientation U Disposition :
It is a Level nakshatra. Falling in the heart of Libra, it has a balancing quality. It thus relays the
diplomatic, pleasing side of Rahu. It can always compromise to achieve its eventual ends. It can be
seen as a combined Venus and Rahu energy and relays the Venusian side of Rahu's functioning. This
makes it good in most Venusian related pursuits like music'
It is a Moveable nakshatra. Its moveable nature is borne out of its close association with the air
elernent through planets Rahu and Saturn. As discussed earlier, its ruling deity Vayu coresponds to
wind, which is one of the constantly moving elements in nature.

[page 229]
241
Lurw Montfr U Day :
It ref ates to the last 9 days of the lunar month of "Chaitra", which usually falls in late April, early
May.
Swati is also related tothe Saptami (7s tithi or day) of the waxing and waning phases of the
Moon's monthly cycle.
Auspirious Actiaitirs:
Good for business & trade activities; Recommended for starting any educational venture; Good
for learning in general; Social activities & events; Dealing with the public; Financial transactions; All
activities which require a calm & flexible approach; The key here is to blow with the wind; Grooming
and self adornment; Buying and Selling in general; Actions where diplomacy is required; Pursuing
Arts & Sciences.
,'i.
Inmspiriaus Actiaitits :
Not good for travel; Fierce or warlike activities; Any type of aggressive behaviour is not likely to
pay ofF in this nakshatra. 
,, ,r
efanetary fotfer :
Rahu is the primary ruler of this asterism and its airy qualities are relayed through it. There is a
strong urge for comfoft and luxury when Rahu is manifesting its energies on an earthy plane. Eafth
is the secondary element of Rahu. Since Swati falls completely in the sign of Libra, Venus has a
strong connection with this asterism. The Rahu-Venus influence together is a highly indulgent
combination, which gives a strong urge for comfort and luxury. A love of show and pomp is seen
when Rahu is functioning through its lower aspect. As disussed earlier, Swati natives often appreciate

[page 230]
242
the finer things in life and uphold a ceftain degree of sophistocation in their dress, mannerisms and
qa$*.
The primarily materialistic energy of Rahu and Venus combined gives Swati natives success in
Venusian business pursuits. In its negative aspect, natives under the heavy influence of this nakshatra
can become a.slave to their desires and are guided by greed and deceit to gain their ends.
Rahu has a diplomatic nature, which is very similar to that of Venus. Rahu, like Venus, is by
nature a social planet and enjoys company. Swati in this regard, can be the most pretentious among
the nakshatras. Rahu is supposed to give an aftistic temperament in much the same way as Venus,
but as always with Rahu, there is a touch of unorthodoxy involved. Rahu's Venusian side is highlighted
in any horoscope whbn it is either associated with Venus in a nativity, or is placed in the second/
seventh houses, or is posited in the signs Taurus/Libra.
In its higher aspect, Swati natives express higher Venusian qualities like diplomacy, compassion
and a thirst for knowledge. Rahu is also very much capable of manifesting highest Venusian energies
.like universal love, compassion and harmony when working through its higher principle.
Rahu, Mercury Venus and Saturn gives strong results in Swati. Sun and Mars are a little out of
sorts here, while Ketu's energy is incompatible with the energies of this nakshatra. Jupiter and Moon
are neutral and give results according to other factors in a nativity'
'Iloutek an{ Alpfrabe* :
The first pada or quafter of this asterism 6o 40' -10o 00' Libra corresponds to "Ru" as in Ruth.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 10o 00' - 13o 20' Libra corresponds to "Re" as in
Rex.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 13o 20' - 160 40' Libra corresponds to "Ro" as in
Robin.

[page 231]
243
The foutth pada or quafter of this asterism 16" 40' - 20o 00' Libra corresponds to "Ta" as in
Tanya.
In the Sanskit alphabet Swati corresponds to "Da" (pronounced as "The") and consequently its
mantra is "Om Dam".
Serya[ type and Corryatihi[ity :
Its sexual animal is a Buffalo. This makes it fertile and it likes to play a dominant role in sexual
activity. This nakshatra is often prone to exploit mib forms of sex and sexuality for business purposes.
Swati can be said to be more of a tease rather than a whore.
For sexual & marital compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the tables on pages 457
& 458.
'Esoterir:
Swati represents the equilibrium point of eveiything. It represents the mid-point of our lives,
the life of the universe and evefihing that exists. It is the midpoint between expansion and contraction.
It is the point where the universe stops expanding and begins contracting. It lies directly opposite
Adtwini, a nakhatra which can be seen as the big bang, which created the material universe.
In our bodies, Swati relates to the five vital pranas or airs. These airs form an interface between
the astral and the corporeal body. It is these airs which are normally referred to as the life force
within us' The preliminary spiritual practices like pranayama are meant to create an equilibrium
between these five vital airs, so that the mind can remain free from ripples when the real meditative
process begins. Swati relates to the immense potential of these body airs, which when util2ed
properly, as done by sages in Ages gone by, allowed them to meditate unhindered for thousands of
years and have lifespans which exceeded lifespans of the Ages.

[page 232]
244
, In the universal scheme of things, Sllaf relates to "Pndhuams shaki" - the power to disperse
like the wind. Its symbolism has roaming around above and change of form below. The relationship
of Swati with the air element is stressed here. The maya element of swati lies in its ability to adjust
itself to any situation or circumstance without losing its own essence. Its free, detached, obseryant
quality makes it easy for it to scatter away any negative buildup on any levd of being' swau can be
seen as the uhiversal vacuum cleaner.
Qotra (Cetestiat Lineage) : " '
This nakshatra is related to the Sage Marichi, one of the seven celestial sages looking after the
affairs of our galaxy. The name of this sage translates into "Light". The "lightness" (as in swiflness)
aspect of this Sage seems to connect well with Swati, considering that Air is a light element'
\gffiedio[ :
For those suffering from bad effects resulting from afflictions to this nakshatra, the best remedial
measure is worshiP of Saraswati.
Repetition Of the rOOt mantras Of this nakShatra - "Om Lam", "Om Ksham", "Om Am" and "Om
Aam" 10g times when Moon transits this nakshatra and in its corresponding lunar month is sure to
ieduce suffering and bring enlightenment into a person's life'
.- ilF..::
persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this nakshatra can also increase the
good effects through the above mentioned ways. It is helpful for them to wear all light, variegated
colours and pastel shades. They should use its directions, lunar month and the days when Moon
transits Swati to undeftake all important actions'

[page 233]
245
Eaampb :
Like many commercial king pins, Nelsn Rockefelterhas his Moon placed in Swati. In his chaft,
Moon is the lord of the eleventh house and is placed in his second house, thus inffuencing both of his
financial houses. It is only in the case of Virgo Ascendants like Nelson, can one see the extent of
material power inherent in Moon's placement in Swati.
Ma* Twain, the famous author and social commentator, was bom with his Ascendant, Mercury
and Saturn in Swati. In his case Swati! intellectual and cognitive side finds expression. It is generally
seen that Mercury has to be connected with Swati in some form for the Sarasruati aspect of Swati to
find expression,
Misceffaneous :
According to Vanhamihira, those born with Moon in Swati are "pleasant in speech, have a self
controlled nature and compassionate ways. The person is a merchant with principles".
***

[page 234]
Zo"oo' Libr -r'Zo' $corpio

[page 235]
16.
'lhsfrakfro
(20000' Libra - 3020' Scorpio)
' In ttu Sky
Vishakha consisb of four stars, which form the left half of the hanging scale shape formed by
the constellation Libra. These stars are known in modern astronomy as Alpha-Librae, Beta-Librae,
Gamma-Librae & Iota-Librae. Despite the fact that all of these stars are part of the constellation of
Libra, a paft of this asterism lies in the zodiacal sign of Scorpio. Among these, Alpha-Librae (Zuben
el Genubi or the Nofth Scale) and Beta-Librae (Zuben el Hakhrabi or the South scale) are the
brightest, with visual magnitudes of 2.75 and 2.61 respectively. The easiest way to spot these stars
is to locate them below the bright star Spica. Ancient Vedic Seers saw these stars as forming the
shape of a forked branch and associated them with the abode of the gods under the rulership of
Indra.
Name :
"Vishakha", like other Sanskrit terms, evokes a wide variety of English meanings - "forked,,,
"two-branched", "poison vessel". Its alternative name is "Radha",which translates into "the delightftrl".
Radha, as a name, has gained popularity by virtue of being the name of Krishna's beloved consort.

[page 236]
250
Syn6o[ :
Its main symbol is a 'decorated arch'or'gateway'. In depictions this gateway is usually decorated
with leaves (refer to image). Such gateways are still a norm in marriage ceremonies in India.
Consequently, one can infer that Vishakha has a lot to do with marriage. Most of Vishakha lies in the
sign goveming marriage, Libra. In the ancient Umes this gateway was symbolic of triumph. It
symbolised the ending or attainment of a goal and the beginning of a new one. It was a reminder of
the fact that challenges don't end once you pass through the gateway, after achieving your goal.
The challenges begin when one enters the gateway, just like the marriage ceremony is the
precursor of the challenges to come in married life. The gateway also suggests that Vishakha always
has its eyes fixed upon the final attainment of a goal. This goal can range from triumphing over one's
external enemies to triumphing over one's inner demons. In the present day and age, where negative
qualities of every nakshatra predominate, Vishakha usually functions as an obssessive, goal-oriented
nakshatra with complete disregard for the nature of the means employed to achieve the desired end.
Despite its association with celebrations, Vishakha cannot be seen as a pleasant nakshatra.
When striving towards a goal becomes the only objective in life, one is likely to have little peace of
mind and will definitely miss the true essence of life. In the words of the contemporary songwriter
John Lennon, "Life is what happens whib we are busy making other plans"'
Deity :
Vishakha, true to its b*ed quality, has two main ruling deities :- Indra and Agni (fire god).
In the puranic literature, Indra, the chief among the demi-gods, is often poftrayed as a very
goal oriented, fixated and offensive character, who would go to any lengths to achieve his desired
ends. The funny thing is that many times his desired ends are completely ungodly and he is getting
into all sorts of troubles as a result. This is a primary theme of Vishakha - pursuing unwholesome
goals in questionable ways and creating bad karma as a result. Indra is also seen as a character who

[page 237]
251
drowns himself in women, wine and other such pleasures. This indulgent side-of Indra also finds
o(pressionjh$ugh Vishakha. -;
' Deceptiveness is also associated with Indra, in the sense that he doesn't shy away from putting
his own near and dear ones in danger, in order to get what he wants. He is also often seen to act in
a cowardly fashion at the first sign of real danger. It is helpful to remember that "Indra" is just a post
which is occupied by different souls in different times in different universes. Vishakha people are
always in search of a post which gives them dominion and pleasure and Indra is just a soul who
.makes it,
Agni, the fire god, basically represents energy in one of its many forms. It is because of Agni
that Vishakha has the capacity to exert herculean efforts in order to attain its goal. Just like fire,
when harnessed properly, can be used in a variety of constructive ways, Vishakha,s strong energy
can manifest as courage, determination and the capacity for hardwork directed towards wholesome
pursuits' Fire in its negative aspect can run amok and burn indiscriminately. In the same way Vishakha
Gln cause harm to others around it before finally getting consumed itself. Terms like', burning grief",
"burning desire" and "burning passion" are all tailor-made Vishakha expressions.
Agni and Indra rule over heat and rain, making Vishakha an agricultural nakshatra. It utilizes
the forces of nature to produce crops and then goes on to derive intoxicants like wine and alcohol
from these crops.
a-'
-' A{ature d furctionlng :
The nature of this Nakshatra can be summed in one word - "fixation.. Even though its
singlemindedness in pursuing its goals is unmatched, ib achilles heel lies in "what goal it chooses to
pursue"' In the present day and age, the likelihood of forming unwholesome goals is intensively
heightened, the presence of this nakshatra in a nativity becomes a cause for concern. Vishakha
natives easily fall prey to excesses in regards to sex and alcohol. They are the ones who have an
overwhelming need to flock to the local bar.

[page 238]
252
There is a ceftain jubilation aspect to Vishakha natives which shows itself in love of pomp and
ceremony. Very often those among Vishakhas who choose the path of the senses end up becoming
mad party types. Following Swati, the nakshatra where actual achievement takes place, Vishakha
represents the exuberant victorious state after the achievement. It is common knowledge that a
sense of emptiness follows any accomplishment. This sense of emptiness is a continous feature
throughout the lives of Vishakha natives. Fire is never satieted no matter how much or how long it
consumes. They are always concerned about what they don't have, rather than making use of what
they have. "The grass looks greener on the other side" mentality breeds a cogmire of unwholesome
emotions. This emptiness and frustration drives some of the more evolved Vishakha natives away
from blind woddiness in search of higher knowledge and truths'
Vishakha naUves have a distinct fierce appearance with prominent slants and angles on the
face even in case of the fairer sex. They usually have sharp eyes and features. Their external
behaviour ranges from extremely coufteous and jovial to completely nasty and obnoxious. Vishakha
natives are very concerned about putting up fronts to gain their ends. This makes them hide their
innate negative feelings towards others in their dealings with them. Most Vishakha natives easily fall
prey to envy, jealousy, viciousness and can't help feeling useless in comparision to those around
them. All these factors make Vishakha natives hard to get along with making them bereft of any real
friends. These negative feelings arise from the same empty place which was mentioned above. The
real problem lies in the fact that these natives become obsessive about these negative feelings and
thoughts and can't let go of them. This is where the fire inside them stafts burning their own selves
instead of being put to any constructive use. Vishakha natives are pretty much defined by their
obsessions, which can range from petty and soul-destroying to soul-nurturing and evolutionary.
The good thing about these natives is that once their mind is made up they are devoted to their
cause and will go to any lengths to fulfill their objective. However it is notlced that life continuously
presents them with two different paths, and they have to make a consciouschoice to sbay on the
right one. Vishakha natives take life as a challenge of softs. They usually make simple things complex
and easy things difficult. The way they go about achieving their objectives does not follow the line of

[page 239]
253
least resistance. They en@unter lots of oHacles, which they are able to sunnqrnt by their one
pointedness, but the process is not free from moans and complaints. The final paradox of this
nakshatra lies at the point where after achieving what they set out to achieve, they are not sure if
that's what they wanted to achieve.
Modc of funrtionhg :
Vishakha is considered to be an Active nakshatra. Pursuit of any goal requires constant activity.
Vishakha is one of the most active nakshatras because of its obssessive approach to things. After
attaining its desired goal, it sets itself another goal and so on and so on.... ib activity is ceaseless.
This is probably the reason why a lot of Vishakha types cannot give a reason for some of the bad
things they have done. It is as if some external force grips them and makes them act thoughtlessly
without reflection. They are possessed individuals.
Caste :
It belongs to the Mlucha (outcaste) caste. It is clear from this classlfication that the ancient
seers saw Vishakha as a natural trouble maker who could not function within society. It related
either to bandib, revolutionaries or hermits retiring to the forest in order to perfonm bpasto obtain
their wishes. None of these characters fit into the ideal society as envisioned by Manu (the grand
overseer and law giver).
' -r J.: . ).2.V-'
*r,r Qen["' '
*'- It is a Female nakshatra. This classification seems to have its roots in its altemative name
'Radha'. Radha is the childhood consort of Krishna who spent the rest of her life pining for him.
Vishakha carries within itself the primarily feminine attribute of "longing", "separation" and "catharsis".
It is the longing for the unattainable, which characterises a Vishakha mindset. Ib other qualities like
ir

[page 240]
254
possessiveness, jealousy ard
Vedic texts.
vindictiveness are also regarded as familiarly feminine qualities in
'l):*Jfllt}Q
".|]
tsodyparts U t{umor (Ayule[ir Constitution) :
The Arms and the Breasts are the body parts related to this nakshatra.
It is a primarily "Kapha" (watery) nakshatra. This classification is borne out of the fact that
Vishakha lies in two kapha signs, Libra and Scorpio. Vishakha, as we discussed earlier, is very good
at hiding its fiery quality under a calm exterior. It is the kapha element which allows Vishakha to put
up a diplomatic front even when a fiery storm is brewing inside'
Direction
It is related primarily to west & north.
eados(qLarters) :
The first pada or quafter of this asterism 20" 00' - 23 20' Libra falls in Aries Navamsa and is
ruled by Mars. This pada is all about energy, impulse, one pointedness and social ambitions. The
focus here is on relationships, but passion and instinct are likely to dominate instead of commitment
and depth. A well placed Mars or Venus are the most suitable planets for this pada.
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 23" 20' - 26" 40' Libn falls in Taurus Navamsa
ruled by Venus. Endurance and durability are the hallmarks of this pada. Planets here tend to give
success in Venusian pursuits. Material ambitions are strong here and since this is the Pushkara
navamsa pada they are fulfilled to the degree allowed by the chart as a whole.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 260 €' - 30" 00' Libra falls in Gemini Navamsa ruled
by Mercury. Vishakha's onepointedness channels itself through thoughts, communication, philosophical

[page 241]
255
and religious attitudes. There's a definite conflict between two opposing furces here - one force
demands the native to be lightheafted, openminded and jovial, while the other promotes selfishness,
deception and anxiety. Only well placed Mercury and Saturn can be counted on for giving good
tff$Hln thispada. j+,
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 00o 00' - 30 20' Scorpio falls in Cancer Navamsa
ruled by Moon. This is the most one pointed of all Vishakhab padas. The turmoil here takes place on
the emotional plane, making this a highly volatile, transformative and dangerous part of the zodiac.
In its lowest aspect, it is highly vindictive and revengeful and embodies most of the despicable
human qualities. In its higher aspect, it can give penetrating insight, strong will power, executive
ability and the conviction necessary to root out the dark forces. Only a well placed Jupiter cap girre
the widom to navigate through the stormy waters of this pada.
!
lProfusiotu :
Bartenders; Alcohol & Liquor Industry; Manual Labourers; Fashion Models & Actresses; All
professions involving use of speech like TV & Radio Broadcasters; Politicians; Marching Bands;
Spotts Persons especially sporG requiring Herculean efforts; Cults & other types of Idealogical Fanatics;
Religious Fundamentalists; ProfessionalAgitators; Soldiers; Dancers; Critics; Criminals & Mafia; Custom
& ImmigraUon fficials; Policing Jobs; Guards; Prostitution & Militant Revolutionarbs.
Vishakha natives can be found in all types of professions but usually have a tendency to switch
professions throughout their lives.
:..
:' .. , , ,. .. ., .,,. .!'
lP{atu :
Rocky Rough Terrains; Mountains; Big Cities like New York; Breweries; Bars; Liquor Shops;
Brothels; Theatres; Military Bases; Ceremonial Halls & Grounds; Interogation Rooms; Waring
Grounds; Danger Areas either in the City or designated by the Military; All places connected with the
above professions.

[page 242]
256
Quna (%serce) anl tattwa (Ebnwnt) :
It is supposed to be a httwic nakshatra. This relates to Vishakha's intense capacity for hardwork
and penance. Vishakha is ready to sacrifice a lot for the attainment of its goals, a quality which is
seen as sattwic from the universal point of view. Vishakha's sattwic quality is more liable to come out
when planets like Sun, Moon and Jupiter occupy this nakshaba.
It belongs to the Fire element. Due to its close association with Agni (the deity presiding over
the element fire), fire becomes the primary element of Vishakha.
, Qana (trye) :
It is considered a Rakhas or demonic nakshatra. Keeping in mind its basic nature and traits,
it is not very hard to understand this classification. A complete disregard for others is considered a
demonic quality and Vishakha is one of the nakshatras which displays it to the hilt. It is because of
its selfish approach that it is classified as demonic even though both of its ruling deities are demF
gods.
Oicntotion d Disposition :
It is a Downward Looking nakshatra. Since downward nakshatras imply containment and
contraction it is Vishakha's duty to contain its multifarious desires. Like all the nakshatras tenanting
the signs Leo, Virgo and Libra, it is a very worldly nakshatra and thus has a lot of ambition in relation
to its role in the world. Since it is a downward nakshatra, it goes about attaining these goals in a
secretive and urderhanded manner and most of its real intent and activities are concealed from
others.
It is a Mixed (sharp and soft) nakshatra . This classification once again emphasizes the duality
inherent'in Vishakha as exemplified by meanings of its name. Its soft disposition relates to its
pleasure seeking side while its sharpness relates to its fixidity of purpose. The softer side is often
rii

[page 243]
257
what stops Vishakha types from turning into complete psychopaths and at times it just acts as a
disguise which lets them get away with their darker activities.
Lunm Montfr d Da4 :
It refates lo the first half of the lunar month of Vaishakha, which usually falls in early May.
Vishakha is also related to the Shashti & Saptani(6u' & 7u' tithis or days) of the waxing and
waning phases of the Mmn's monthly cycle.
Atupicions Actiaities
Aggressive or warlike activities; Any activity requiring executive ability; Getting things done
which require an argumentative approach; Harsh activities in general; Any activity requiring strong
mental focus; Working toward one's goals; All types of cerernonies, functions and parties; Awards or
Decoration Ceremonies; Dressing up, Ornamentation, Decorating oneself; Romance & Sexual Activity;
Peforming penance; Making Resolutions.
Inauspicious Actiaitits :
Not good for Travel; Marriage; Initiations of any kind; Activities requiring diplomacy or tact
Qfanetary fuitzr
Venus, Mars, Pluto, Ketu and Jupiter are the three planetary influences connected to Vishakha.
Jupiter is the main ruler of this asterism, whib Venus, Mars, Pluto and Ketu rule the respective signs
that Vishakha occupies.
Jupiter connects to this asterism through Indra, whose preceptor is Erihaspati. Jupiter supports
most of Indra's objectives and ambiUons, even the unwholesome ones, through this nakshatra. Its

[page 244]
258
natural benevolence, grace and good fortune can be used for pompous extravagance under the
influence of this nakshatra.
Venus, Jupiter's counterpaft and adversary is connected with the first three padas of Vishakha.
It is the natural antagonism between the energies of these two planets which makes Vishakha a
turbulent nakshatra. A lot of Indra's Venusian excesses as enumerated in numerous puranic legends
are not sanctioned by Jupiter; and it goes without saying that Indra lands into some sort of trouble
each time.
In the foutth pada, Mars co-rules along with Jupiter and thus the energy is more softed out but
has a militaristic tone to it. The PluWKetu influence in the Scorpio part of Vishakha lends a great
deal of impulsiveness, explosive drama and self destructiveness. Only when channelled into more
occult areas can this energy act as a vehicle for transformation.
Venus-Jupiter, Venus-Mars, Venus-Mars-Ketu, Jupiter-Mars and Jupiter-Mars-Ketu-Venus
conjunctions carry an energy similar to that of Vishakha. In the authorb experience only Jupiter
functions well in this nakshatra in the present day and age.
'Ilouefs and Alpfiabe* :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 20o 00' -23 20' Libra corresponds to "Ti" as in
Teehan.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 23" 2O' - 260 40'Libra corresponds to "Tu" as in
Tuesday.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 26" 40' - 30o 00' Libra corresponds to 'Te" as in
Taylor.
The fourth pada or quafter of this asterism 00o 00' - 3o 20' Scorpio corresponds to "To" as in
Tommy.

[page 245]
259
In the Sanskrit alphabet Vishakha corresponds to "Dha" and "Na" consequengy its mantras are
"Om Dham" and "Om Nam'i. ,., :.. .:
Sereut Type and Compatifiitity :
Its sexual animal is a Tiger' This points towards an aggressive and dominant attitude in sexual
activities. It is mostry compatibre with chitra, the other tiger nakshatra.
For marital & sexual compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the tables on pages 457
&458.
'Esoteric :
The now globally famous Radha-Krishna love legend exemplifies Vishakha,s inner core. This is
the reason why vishakha has "Radha" as one of its names. Radha was already married to someone
when she fell in love with Krishna and romanced him in his childhood years. But since Krishna was
Vishnu's incarnation this was no ordinary love. It epitomized a desire on Radha,s part to merge with
Universal energies, not as an inferior but as a lover. Vishakha's longing for perfection and enlightenment
is always expressed in terms of love and relationships, which more often than not break societal
conventions and moralistic taboos. Vishakha does not distinguish between fun, frolic and pain of
such relationships and ta4sya,the intense spiritual practice leading to knowledge and enlightenment.
Above all else, its ultimate goal is experiencing the divine in and through relauonship with the divine
itself.
Being the 16h nakhatra in the nakhatra sequence, it relates to the number ,,16,,, a number
which is seen as the number of tragedy, uphearal, ruin and turmoil. The destruction and ruin here is
only of that which stands against the universal will. Nevertheless it becomes evident that vishakha,s
path is not all romance and roses. This is clear from the fact that Radha spent a major part of her life
pining for Krishna to"t..l."J"r,,for taking care of the purpose behind his incarnation. This intense

[page 246]
260
longing and the pain of separation is Vishakha's tapasya and if it can keep the fire of love burning
regardless of the outer circumstances, it achieves immortality like Radha did'
In the universal scheme of things, Vishakha relates lo "vyapana shakti" - the power to make
manifest and achieve various things. Its symbolism has haruest below and cultivation above' This
makes it a fruitful naKhatra on the material plane, even though as we have just realized' its true
spiritual path lies elsewhere. The material results here usually come with persistent and patient
effort, just like the finest wine takes a long time to be ready for consumption after the grains have
been put through the brewing process'
Q otra (Cetzsdat Liruage)
This nakshatra is related tothe Sage vashishta, one of the seven celestial sages looking after
theaffairsofourga|axy.Thenameofthissagetranslatesinto..possessorofwea|th..'Wecan
imagine that Vishakha must relate to the sage's capacity for penance' As Varahamihira says' 'Those
with Moon in Vishakha are skilled at making money"'
fumedinl :
For those suffering from bad effects resulting from afflictions to this nakshatra, the best remedial
measure is worship of the eight Vasus. Alternatively one can worship the half vishnu, half shivaforn
commonfy known as Hari Hara.The practice of Raia Yoga, which involves the raising of the kundalini
through the seven sacred centres, is one of the best ways to utilise this nakshatra's potential'
Repetition of the root mantra of this nakshatra - "om Yam" and "om Ram" 108 times when
Moon transits this nakshatra and in its corresponding lunar month is sure to reduce suffering and
bring enlightenment into a person's life'
Persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this nakshatra can also increase the
good effects through the above mentioned ways. It is helpful for them to wear colours like red, blue

[page 247]
261
and gold. They should use its directions, lunar month and the days when Moon transits Vishakha to
undeftake all impoftant actions.
E4ampk:
Hermann Goenng, Hitlerbrighthand man, has his Moon in Vishakha. Nothing much needs to be
said about a man who was one of the main forces behind the fanatical Nazi movement. His life brings
out the obssessive maniacal streak of Vishakha.
Nicole Kidman, the Hollywood actress, is a typical example of a Vishakha Ascendant type. Her
obssessive and secretive personality shows through in her films and interviews. Vishakha is one of
the nakshatras, which is soft of a prerequisite for being part of the community now known as
Hollywood.
Misce[[aneoru :
According to Varahamihira, those with Moon in Vishakha are "jealous, greedy, clever with words,
skilled at earning money, quarrelsome and incite quarrels among others".
***

[page 248]
t /. y',nuradha tozo' $corpio - | 6'10' $corpio

[page 249]
L7.
Anurodfio
(3o20' Scorpio - 16o40' Scorpio)
In tfu Sky t
Anuradha consists of three stars in a row, which were seen by the ancients as forming a shape
similar to a staff' These three stars are known in modem astronomy as futa-furpionis (Acnb),
Delta-Scorpionis (sidi) & Pi-Scorprbnis. All of these stars lie in the beginning of the zodiacal
constellation of Scorpio. Beta-scorpionis is the brightest among these stars with a visual magnitude
of 2'62' All of these stars can be easily spotted in the dark night sky from the countryside, if one
focates the bright star Antares in the constellation of Scorpio, close to the white stretch of the
milkyway. These three stars lie directly above this bright star in a staff like formation (very close to
a straight line).
A{ame :
--"Anuradha" translates simply into "Another Radha"or "After Radha". Its alternative meaning is
"Subsequent Success". This name, as we ctrn see, has its root in the fact that it follows the asterism
Radha ( Vishakha). Even though it is not apparent straightaway, the often ignored fact is that these
two asterisms (Vishakha & Anuradha) form a pair in the same way as puruaphatguni and
Uttaraphalguni. .:' ,;;!

[page 250]
266
Sytnlot :
AE!1 the main symbol of this asterism, is directly derived from the shape ancient Vedic seers
ascribed to its constituent stars. The staff has always been seen as a symbol of power and protection.
In the puranic lore most of the exalted sages carry a staff. It is in fact the only weapon that they
carry but it is usually more than enough as it carrls within itself all lhe power of their penance
The readers.can refer to the puranic story of Vishwamitra challenging Sage Vashishf4 where all
of Vishwamitra's weapons including the Bnhmartra (similar to a nuclear missile) were useless against
Vashishta,s staff. These sages never used a staff for offensive purposes' It is only used for self-
defence.Ittypifies@dthuscanon|yactincongruencewiththeUniversa|
mind. This nakshatra relates to learning and the retention of learnilg=It also relates to one's
relationship with the Universal force. The stronger the contact, the more powerful the effect of this
nakshatra becomes. 
' !
ar--) A .btus, is another symbol ascribed by scholars and sages to this nakshatra, Since ancient
1",/\-/ times, the qualities of purity, auspiciousness, knowledge and enlightenment have been associated
with the lotus. In fac'. Saraswati, the goddess of learning and Laxmi, the goddess of prosperity' are
often depicted as sitting atop a lotus.
A lotus has the ability to grow in muddy waters. This represents the ability of this nakshatra to
keep itse|f pqg_g1q|gatrzliin any surroundings' It a|so signifies the 3EllryIlg lno\^,|edse
th."gh the muddy Pu
njriumpnant gateway is another alternative symbol of this nakshatra'
The readers will remember that the preceding asterism, Vishakha, also has this as its main symbol'
As we mentioned earlier, Vishakha is a soft of a ally or co-worker of Anuradha. Just like Vishakha,
Alurcdna aSo rePresen
It is also a goal centred nakshatra in much the same way as its ally, but its goals are usually
more in tune with universal plan. It also likes to attain its goals through group work rat!sl*!!{
Sggj alone. This is probably the reason why Anuradha attains its goals more smoothly and

[page 251]
267
effortlessly, in comparison to Vishakha. Vishakha is often reluctant to take help or cooperate with
a||ies.Inmyexperience,IhaveseenthatVishakha,moreoftenthannot@
goals. In most cases this ally is Anuradha.
Deity
IullXa, one of the twelve Adityas (slar deities) rules Anuradha. The name'Mitra'translates into
Yriend'. Thus it comes as no surprise that he is the solar deity related to friendships, good faith and
cgrd'a[y. His qualites infuse this nakshatra with lightheartedness, warmth, leadership, friendliness,
helpfulness and a generally optimistic view of life. Mitra's concem for friendship can be seen from
the fact that he is never invoked alone. He is always invoked along with either /erurq llthe ruling
deity of Shatabishall or Aryaman (the ruling deity of Uttaraphalgunll. One can easif deduce from
-4 ,,
the above that Anuradha is most friendly with these two nakshatras.
If it weren't for Mitra, the world would be a much more dangerous place to live in. All the
natural qualities usually associated with the sign Aquarius correlate to Mitra as well as Anundha. It
is interesting to note that Anuradha lies in the 10h house for those born with Aquarius rising. Under
the guidance of Mitra, sometimes even enemies can work together in order to achieve a goal. The
readers can refer to the "Churning of the Ocean" story in the author's previous work 'The Rahu-Ketu
Experience", ggarPublications, India or "The Key Of Life', Lotus Press, USA where bitter enemies,
gods and demons agreed to work together for attaining ceftain ends.
Sinc{Anuradha is so concerned with learning and accumulahon of knoutpdger/hraswati, the{
goddess of learning, can be said to be strongly connected to this nakshatra. This is the only way one
canexplainthe@Aswehaveseenear|ier,Sarasn'atia|wayssitson
a lotus (a symbol of Anuradha) with a Vina (stringed instrument).

[page 252]
268
Ngtuo 6 funrtionhg :
The keyword for Anuradha is'exploration'. This exploration, however, is not a lonesone ordeal,
but a joyous, communal combinaUon of people and energies. Anuradha brings to life the hidden
secrets of natureb functionings through establishing a bridge between naturally discordant energies.
Anuradha fosters communication between allthe extremes - the young and the old; the mature
and immature; the more evolved and the less evolved; the different races, castes etc. Anuradha can
thus be seen as a universal solvent. Most of Anuradha's tendencies put it outside the orthodox, social
gambit. This is the reason why it falls in the heaft of Scorpio, a sign which questions and grows out
of the social sensibilities represented by the sign Libra. In a way, Anuradha is the nakshatra of the
ry9:!q.L"dl*yrgtnin!r1q9$j9grs. In the present times, Anuradha
it ability to see through the reality behind all the fake media
propaganda on social, econoqrjg pnd political levels. ,. :. , ,.. jr::::
The fact thatAnuradha is open to all doesn't mean that it doesn't discriminate. Evolved Anuradha
natives are in fact quite discriminative and cautious as to who they let into their inner circle. In the
present day and age, where every nakshairab energy has been utilized for negaUve ends, Anuradha
falls prey to excessive openness and frivolous friendships.
The logic oriented approach of this nakshatra accounts for the fact that many Anuradha natives
aregttracted to-material-sciences like mathematics and physiF. The ability of Anuradha to combine
logic, intuition and freedom of thought produces deep thinkers in everv field. Numbers are something
which takes Anuradha's fancy like no other thing. A lot of Anuradha natives have a strong interest
either in occult_Allnqldene_lu'meroLogy or statistics. Anuradha always tries to broaden its horizons
in relation to its area of interest. The more evolved the soul, the more all encompassing the vision.
Natives with strong influence of Anuradha on their ascendant are born with stout hairy bodies.
They have prominent chest and thighs and have a tendency to develop a belly with age. Their face
conveys a sense of friendliness and well-being. A slight hint of secrecy emanates from the eyes and
the overall demeanour in general. Their social behaviour fluctuates between passivity and exuberance.
Combining friendliness with aloofness is their special $ftl

[page 253]
269
Anuradha natives are usually seen making special effoft to put people at ease and love to act as
a bridge between people, groups and organizations. They are very interested in anythino to do with
>g
the occult and hidden issues in general. They are e
ior.
It is their ability to keep up solid exteriors which makes them good organizers. Anuradha nqqy$'-
are often seen tb be the founders and leaders of organizations. They have original minds which are
melting pots of myriad pieces of knowledge, understanding and experience.
!:
b Most Anuradha natives channel their emotional energy in the form of devotion to some higher
deity, universal energy or cluse. Anqradha natives are at their most vergqtilg_when they have to
combine their talents with others. Despite their need for constant interaction, @AlgeqEjgliyes
@ at onb time of their lives or the other.
c"riosity makes them tr to forgiEl rands. Thev tue3'teJrgsy__lTe
relating to and adjusting to foreign environments in comparision to other nakshatras. In fact, living
in foreign lands is usually very satisfying and fruitful for them.
In the universal scheme of things, Anuradha relates to "radhana shakti" - the power of worship.
Its symbolism has ascension above and descension below. This symbolism stresses upon Anuradha,s
ability to explore and undersbnd both the lower and higher lot<asthrough its devotirn.&utversal
energies.
Modc of functionhtg :
Anuradha is considered to be a passive nakshatra. By itsetf, Anuradha is a h1gllypassl5 enlgy,
just like a seesaw in its stationary balanced position. It usually requires an external agency in the
form of co-workers/friends to put it into action. Its passive quality often results from Saturn
overpowering Mars, while its activity resulb from the maftian and saturnine energies being in equal
balance.

[page 254]
270
Caste :
It befongs to the Silygln caste. This classification obviously relates to the fact that Saturn, the
Shudra planet, is the planetary ruler of Anuradha. Anuradha is a service orientated nakshatra. Even
a leader is nothing but servant to those he leads.
Qerdzr : .
(}L;
It is a Male nakshatra. This classification relates to its male presiding deity and its association
with the male planet Mars. Anuradha represents the masculine force, which tries to open up and
look through the wheel of nature'
. -i.4;
tsodyparts U l{unwr (Ayutve{ic Corstitution ) :
Breasts, Stomach, Bowels and the womb are the body parts related to this nakhatra.
It is a primarily "pE'(ft ry) nakshatra. Anuradha relates to allthe electrical and astralfires
within our body. The astral fires are carried by the three channels lda, Pingalg and sushumna.
- Directiott :
It is related primarily to nodft, south and west.
tPatros (Qnrters) :
The first pada or quafter of this asterism 3o 20' - 60 40' Scorpio falls in Leo Navamsa ruled by
Sun. The emphasis here is on understanding one's inner self and applying that understanding in the
outer world through career etc. The tendency towards excessive pride or militancy has to be curbed
here if one wants posigve expression of the intense energy available here. Sun, Mars, Jupiter and
Ketu are especially strong in this pada'
i t: i:i

[page 255]
271
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 60 40' - 10" 00' Scorpio falls in Virgo Navamsa ruled
by Mercury. This pada is all about continous learning, discipline, discrimination, groupwork and
organization. This pada delves into the mysteries of the Universe and in doing so takes the mystery
out of them. Numbers, calculation and classification are its domain. Being a Pushkara navamsha
pada it promises fulfillment of objectives. Mercury & Rahu are especially strong here.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 10o (X)' - 13o 20' Scorpio falls in Libra Navamsa ruled
by Venus. The concerns here can range from arts, music, bohemia to occult. There is always a
certain degree of self-undoing and wastefulness associatd with this pada, Planets here give a highly
sociable nature. Venus and Saturn suit this pada's energies more than the other planets.
a.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 13o 20' - 160 40' Scorpio falls in Scorpio Navamsa
ruled by Mars. There is abundant energy available here to pursue all kinds of esoteric and exoteric
goals. Only struggle here lies in channeling the energy constructively in tune with Universal
functionings. Planets here function from a plane of excessive passion and emotion. They can give
the ability to achieve much if the rest of the nativity supports it. Sun, Jupiter, and Ketu are better
suited to haMling the energy of this pada.
-:-.+! ..:':r :-.,t:*.? *_ ,; _'
lProfusioru :
Hypnotisb & Psychic Mediums; Occultists; Institution & Organization Heads; Astrologers; Spies;
Alloccupations involving Night Duty; Photographers; Gnema related professions in general; Musicians;
Attists; Managers; Industrialists; Promoters; Counsellers; Psychologists; Scientists; Numerologists;
Statisticians; Mathematicians; Explorers; Miners; Factory Workers; Diplomats; All professions
connected with dealing with Foreign Countries, Travel and Foreigners; All professions requiring group
activity.
,'
t '':ii

[page 256]
272
Q[ocu :
Forests; Mountains; Caves & Caverns; Lakes; Isolated Landscapes; Old Ruins, Castles etc;
Stadiums; MetropoJis; Technological & Industrial areas; Study & Research Places; Temples & other
places used for the Practice and Study of Religion and OcculVSpiritual Topics; Places of Occult
Significance; Organization Headquarters; All places connected with the above mentioned professions.
'' guna (T-ssence) and Tattwa (Efzment) :
It is supposed to be a Tamasb (ineft) nakshatra. This classification comes about due to its
relationship with Mars and Saturn, two inherently tamasic planets. It is Anuradha's job to create
evolution through the balancing of two opposing tamasic tendencies. Evolution on all planes takes
place by taking the middle path. Even though Anuradha is a tamasic nakshatra, it has the power to
bring about spiritual flowering through inner gentleness and balancing of opposites. '4t&'+
It belongs to the Fire element. Its relationship with the fiery planet Mars is responsible for this
classification. Anuradha's fire is more like fire over water, unlike the explosive petrol.fire of Aries. Its
fieriness is resporsible for its warmth, friendship and associations.
-i,
Qana EWd t
It is considered a ryg.g-@y_naUshatra. This classification is clear from its soft, mild and
tender mode of functioning. Anuradha is the nakshatra which strives to create harmony and
understanding at all levels of existence. Besides making humans work with each other, it has the
capacity to make the gods, demons, humans, serpents and sages all work together for a common
cause.

[page 257]
273
Oripntation d Disposition :
It is a Level nakshatra in keeping with its balanced nature. Since the main task of Anuradha is
to balance out the energies of two contrary planets Mars and Saturn, it has to work in a level way.
Itis a "Mridu " or soft, tender and mild nakshatra. The best way to understand this classification
is to think about Anuradha's symbol, a lotus. A lotus is a soft and tender flower with a mild scent.
This just goes to show that Anuradha's approach to uncovering the wheel of nature isn't that of a
forceful warrior, but that of a gentle lover.
Lunar Montft d Day :
It relates to the second half of the lunar month of, Vaishakha. This month usually corresponds
.tjri;.to middle or late May in the solar calendar.
Anuradha is also related to the Duadashi(l2d' tithi or day) of the waxing and waning phases of
the Sgon's qo4fhly cycle. ,:"5* 16.ti:; :- .:ujt].
:l
.i-
, Anspbiors 4.*iEiti*,,; j.s r{ ffragrt ;s :ig g;€si ' i'- llrA
Group related activities; Research & Study in the sciences or occult subjects; Meditation; Exploring
nature; Favourable for managerial activities requiring on the spot decision making; Good for travel;
Immigration & dealing with all foreign affairs; Healing; Spending time with friends; Finances &
Accounting; Quiet reflection; Secretive Activities.
Inawpiriow Actiaitits :
Marriage; Not good for activities requiring direct confrontation; Not good for inaugurations or
beginnings; Unfavourable for routine, mundane activities.

[page 258]
274
9{arctary &[.er : lr*:'-'"' .:
Mars, Pluto, Sab"rm and Ketu are the planets connected to this nakshatra. Saturn is the main
planetary ruler herg and ib sfong influence is evident in the discipline inherent in Anuradha. Satum
makes Anuradha serious about life in general, It makes Anuradha natives go beyond superficial
layers of regular social interactions and search for the answers to the mysteries of life. It gives them
an ability to understand and then transcend the limitations of the material realm. A well-defined
sense of purpose for one's existence is sought here through the influence of the two main karmic
planets - Saturn and Ketu.
Ketu is responsible for this nakshatra's foray into occult and the unseen hidden realms of
existence. Mars provides the initiative, impulse and energy necessary for any exploration. Pluto
expands the conscious and sub-conscious boundaries allowing Anuradha to tap into collective rather
than personal concems.
Ma6-Satum conjunctions or mutual aspects, especially when they are placed in Saturnine
signs or nakshatas, carry an energy similar to that of Anuradha. Satum-Plttto, Ketu-Pluto, Satunr'
Mars-Pluto conjunctions also partly carry energies similar to that of Anuradha.
All planets have an ability to function in a beneficial way in this Nakshatra. tike atways, tleir
level of beneficiality depends upon the overall tone of the nativity and the evolutionary status of the
nauve' ',4i:. ,:qc ::r:' .'':r i- '-r:,;i : +:-' " :i
: i;:A i: , [r:-,,. ,-f :: il.llLf
ilouefs and ALpfrabe* :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 3o 20' -6o 40' Scorpio corresponds to "Na" as in
Nassau.
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 60 40' - 10o 00' Scorpio corresponds to "Ni" as in
Nilofer.

[page 259]
275
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 10o 00' -13o 20' Scorpio corresponds to "Nu" as in
Nutan.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 13o 20' - 160 40' Scorpio corresponds to "Ne" as in
Neha.
In the Sanskrit alphabet Anuradha corresponds to "Tam", 'Tham" and "Dam" consequently its
mantras are "Om Tam", "Om Tham" and "Om Dam".
:r*5f$n S,
"r#i
.:,' L':, -'1+*' ,t i'
-i#i'.,
SeryaI tgpe and Compatifii[ity :
r.
Itssexua|anima|isaDeer.qry|1:',de|icacyandficklenessarc
expressed in the sexual behaviour of those under tlle influence of this nakshatra. Anuradha is most
compaUble with the other deer nakshatra Jy6ttta.
tor marital & sexual compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to Bte tables on pages 457
& 458. .
Esoteric :
Anuradha, being the seventeenth nakshatra, relates to the number'17'. This number is usually
seen as a bringer of celestial waters down to the earth plane. It allows for a sdfe refrge from the
vicissitudes of life. It must be mentioned here that Anuradha is the nakshatra presiding over the
science of Numerology. The Universe, in a way, is a game of numbers and Numerology forms the-.-
backbone of all esoteriggciences like Astrology, Aruradha is_a decoder of the secret functionings of
the universe. B'I
The reaf function of Anuradha, however, relates to the movementof kundalini(serpent energy)
through the chakras (seven sacral centres), The awakening of the kundalini from its dormant state
in the Muladhara Chakra happens under the energies of Ashlesha. After Ashlesha, Anuradha is the
first nakshatra where a full scale exploration of all the chakras takes place. This exploration usually

[page 260]
276
bears a fot of fruits within the same lifetime - one's old karmas get nullified and one gets access to
universal functionings. The bodily nerues become capable of carrying direct, astral, causal impressions.
In other words, one becomes friends with the universe.
Out of this friendship comes harmony and balance in one's thoughts and actions. If the full
potential of Anuradha is utilized, there is no karma being birthed through actions and only a seeking
for knowledge and enlightenment remains.
The story of how Anuradha becomes friends with the universe starts with its pair nakshatra
Radha (Vishakha). Once one has utilized Vishakhat one pointed approach to dedicate oneself to one
of the governing energies of the universe, it is but natural that a very friendly and intimate rapport
will be established by the time Anuradha comes along.
More is expected out of Anuradha than just personal enlightenment. AlgtgilUjSlgPPgled to
share its experiences and accumulated knowledge with its fellow beings (souls). This spreading of
knowledge is meant to be in a coded form, so that it only reaches those who are ripe enough to
receive it, The story of Sage Vishwamitra (the name translates into "friend of the whole world"), who
went on to become a Brahmarishi (the highest post in the hierarchy of the sages) from an ordinary
king, encompasses the various aspects of Anuradha's functionings from a universal standpoint.
Qotra (Cetzstut Lg9rye), :
This nakshatra is related to the Sage Angiras, one of the seven celestial sages looking after the
affairs of our galaxy. The name of this sage translates into "the fiery one". The association of
Anuradha with this particular rishi is not very apparent except for the fuct that Anuradha falls in the
sign Scorpio ruled by the fiery planets Mars, Ketu and Pluto.

[page 261]
277
fumefiat i
For those suffering from bad effecb resulting from afflictions to this nakshaua, the best remedial
measure is worship of the terlve Adityas, especially Mitra. Alternatively one can worship the half
Vishnu, half Shiva form commonly known as Hari Hara.fhe practice of Raja Yqa, which involves
the raising of the kundalini through the seven saq€d centres is one of the best ways to utilise this
nakshatra's potential.
Repetition of the root mantra of this nakhatra - "Om Yam" and "Om Ram" 108 times when
Moon transits this nakshatra and in its corresponding lunar month is sure to reduce suffering and
bring enlightenment into a person's life.
Persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this nakhatra can also increase the
good effects through the above mentioned ways. It is helpful for them to wear colours like red, blue
and gold. They should use its directions, lunar month and the days when Moon trarsits Anuradha to
undertake all important actions.
Eagntpfc :
Jim Morrison, the singer & songwriter of the fumous 60's group The Doorc, was born with
Anuradha rising on his Ascendant. His life, personality and works reveal the mysterious functionings
of this occult nakshatra.
Fridreich NieEche, the famous philosopher, has his Moon placed in Anuradha. Readers can
refer to the birth chaft analysis of both these personalities in the author's prcvious work ('The Rahu-
Ketu Experience" hgarPubliations, India or "The Key of Life" Lotus press,IJSA).

[page 262]
278
Misceffaneous : '';'
According to Vanhamihira, Moon in Anuradha makes one "wealthy, a traveller, living in fureign
countries and one needs to satisfy their appetite immediately as they find it difficult to bear hunger".
'J =
' 
,:.1;.
*** .i!k
,?r.. ,Ji€-r'
**: : nt'

[page 263]
t e. )geshta | 6'+0'$coryio -ro"oo, $corTio

[page 264]
*i 3i Jr;'
3f$k
-e.::
*,:r:;r.,;i-ii
. fri
drfit:
{ gri'i
18.
Igesfi.n
.:*
ii ':':: .
Scorpq5; 30000' $gorpio)
.I! tfie,Skg : .r r_r 3<
7- Jyeshta, the seniormost among the first eighteen asterisms, consisb of \frree stars in a rowi
which were seen by the ancients as forming a shape similar to an ear-ring (or in some cases the top
of an umbreffa) . These three stars are known in modern astronomy as Atpha-fupionis (Anbre),
Sigma-Scorpionisand Tau-Scorpionis. All of these stars lie in the middle to end portion of the zodiacal
constellation of Scorpio. Antares, the star with a reddish hue, is the brightest among these stars with
a visual magnitude of L.07 and was revered by all ancient cultures. It is in fact one of the brightest
objects in the night sky, which makes it easy for one to spot this asterism in the night sky.
5P
A{ante :
"Jyeshta" translates simply into the "Eldest" or "Seniormost". As is the case with some other
asterisms, Jyeshta's nanre immediately reveals a lot about its nature and functioning. Jyeshta is
considered the eldest among the first eighteen nakshatras. At some point of Ume in ancient history
only eighteen nakshatras were in use and Jyeshta was the final, the senior most or eldest nakshatra.
Since then more nakshatras have been added, but the narne has stayed

[page 265]
282
Syn6o[:
Its main symbol is a'round talisman'. In all the ancient civilizations and legends, one can see
that a round talisman is seen as a symbol of divine protection. In many cases, one will find that it is
also a symbol of an authoritarian position'
A circula.r earring is also a soft of round talisman and all the kings of the past were expected to
wear big, round earrings. Thus an 'earring' can also be seen as a symbol of this nakshatra.
A round talisman, ring or earring are all considered to be related to the governing forces of the
universe. As all wise men have known throughout the ages, everylfiing in nature happens in circles.
In ancient times, the king was supposed to be the person who is representative of the higher
governing forces on earth. The fact that he used this circle symbolism showed that he was connected
to these forces.
One can automatically infer that this nakshatra relates to all those in authority positions. This
authority is usually conferred on one for their relative proximity to the governing universal forces.
This may be the result of repeated past life efforts in the fields of karma, occult practices and
penance.
The most important example of a circular occult symbol is the Ouroboros, a coiled snake
swallowing its tail. The serpent symbolism relates to Rahu and Ketu and the kundalini shafti' fhe
reader can refer to the author's previous work 'The Rahu-Kefu EYprience", Sagar Publiations'
India or 'The Key of Life", Lotus Press, USA- "&
An .umbrella'is an alternative symbol of this nakshatra. The most basic function of an umbrella
is to protect one from rain, sun or wind i.e. nature's forces. In the same way this nakshatra is
supposed to provide protection against the universal forces. This is the reason why all kings and
queens in olden days never went out without an umbrella on top of their head. It was the most
visible royal insignia.

[page 266]
283
This protection usually comes about through a detailed understanding of the occult knowledge
of Universal functions. In a way, the priestly class was the protective shield for a king. In today's day
and age where most of the masses are totally ignorant of the occult and have little knowledge of
Universal functionings, the truly protective aspect of this nakshatra is rarely seen. However the
politicians and the ruling class of today do take the aid of occult practices in secret (away from public
view), to protect their power and position.
Deity :
'' Indra, the scion of the Gods, is the main governing deity of this nakhatra. It is impoftant to
mention here that Indra is just a post, which different souls occupy at different times. A soul who
has done enough penance is put on this post. In the same way Jyeshta has the capacity to bestgw
an authority position here on earth as a result of past life efforts.
The word "Indra" translates into "a celestial drop". This meaning can be looked at in different
ways. Indra, even though he is a king of the gods, is a mere drop as far as the universe is concerned.
On the other hand, we can see that this meaning relates well to the fact that Indra was regarded as
the rain god in most of the ancient cultures.
-? . - iliJ*:
Around five thousand years ago, Indra was the most worshipped among all the deities. The
Vedas, especially the earlier ones, are full of remarks about his splendour and glory. His worship
suruived even up to a period around 500 B. C., as cirn be inferred from the fact that the Greek
worshipped a thunder god known as 'Thor". This thunder god was supposed to wield a thunder bolt
in much the same way as Indra, who is always portrayed with a thunder bolt in his hand.
Rain was important to all civilizations because agriculture was directly equated with prosperity.
It is no wonder then, that this nakshatra is related to prosperity on the material plane of existence.
In a way this nakshatra also conveys a certain strong concern for prosperity, in much the same way
as people in the olden days eagerly awaited the rains to fall. When the rainbll is irregular, it can
destroy agriculture rather than support it. This brings out the fact that this nakhatra can, at many

[page 267]
284
times, bring about depravity and hard Umes instead of prosperity. This can also be seen from the fact
that when the rulers of a nation are corrupt and greedy, its subjects will encounter adversity.
With the invention of new technologies, the dependance of agriculture on rain diminished aM
so did the worship of Indra. Krishna can be said to be the first one who tumed the common people
away from the worship of Indra. He encouraged them to establish direct communication with the
forces of nafurc instead. After all Indra's power only relies on his connection with these forces. Even
today, the ruling elite go to great lengths to maintain this connection, while the common people toil
away mindlessly.
, Indra comes out as a rumbustious, proud, vain, tricky and unreliable character in most of the
puranic stories. Most of the elements of his nature are conveyed through this nakshatra. In this way
Jyeshta is very similar to Visttakha, the other nakshatra ruled by Indra. Jyeshta, however, is much
more controlled, secretive and deliberating in comparison to Vishakha. orp can say that Jyeshta
functions in a positive or negative way depending on who the Indra is at any given point in time. In
a birthchart however, an afflicted Jyeshta willtend to bring out the negative qualities like depravation,
misuse of power and authority, unnecessary vainity etc.; while a well fortified Jyeshta will bring
about prosperity, genuine @ncetn and protectiveness towards others'
One peculiarity of Jyeshta is that it gives prosperity only through some occult, supernatural or
exgaordinary means. This arises from the fact that Indra always gets his position and power through
penance and other occult activities. He even got his thunderbolt through the occult propitiation of a
sage caffed Dadhichi.Interested readers can refer to 'Amar Chitn Katha" comics for puranic stories
;}tY j(Xtt,f,U ?it. : sr,.
rebted to Indra.
.i..
."r*ail t.
2A.
' t=xllgtti iiir-';rS-rr. :*Sivti
Nnt*e d furrctioning :
"A sense of arriving or becoming" characterizes Jyeshta. Jyeshta completes the second series
of nine nakshatras beginning frqg, Magha. This series is mostly to do with involvqment in worldly
activities on the earhly plane. :e. ' ')J

[page 268]
285
Jyeshta is a nakhatra where keeping up an image is more important than anything else.
Jyeshta natives usually do evefihing from a point of view which cares a great deal about how
others are perceiving them. They want to gain respect in society and do whatever is necessary to
adhere to the prwailing standards. In ancient times when real acts of charity, kindness and philanthropy
were the stepping stones to a respectful position, Jyeshta functioned well. In the present day and
age where excessive headless materialism is the standard, Jyeshta energy geb channelled in useless,
self-destructive ways. The stereotypical mob leaders, conupt and unwise politicans, beaurocrab
and managers are all Jyeshta characters.
Natives with Jyeshta rising or having strong Jyghta influence connected to the AscendanL
usually mature very quickly both physically and mentally. They have well proportioned bodies but
are not able to hold onto their youth for long. Their upper body is usually stronger than their lower
body. The easiest way to spot them is to pay attention to their penetrating and probing eyes.
.. Jyeshta natives are apt to magniff their troubles and woes. There is no beating Jyeshta when
it comes to unnecessary exaggerated moaning and groaning. The continent of Africa is under
sffong influence of Jyeshta energy. It is no wonder then that tre "Blus" as a musical art form, came
from this continent.
A rwengeful and vindictive tendency is often noticed in Jyeshta natives. They also fall prey to
jealousy very easily and are always on the lookout to put others down. A strong competitive spirit
rather than an internal direction is what makes them manifest the full extent of their abilites.
t:.
The goodness of Jyeshta natives lies in their ability to be protective towards the wea( subordinate,
helpless and underprivileged. They can purge themselves headlong into danger in order to prctect
others. Besides sticking to their word, they have a responsible attitude to the affairs that fall under
their domain. However at times they can also carry their sense of responsibility and protectiveness
to extremes. In todayt day and age, most of Jyeshta's functioning is confined to the military police
and similar Martian pursuits. Since all these forces are guided and controlled by a dark el1e there b
no real sense in zealously llentiffing mesetr with these branches.
::t' .,"!irr'*|En6Fl+-&€Jy.i

[page 269]
286
Modt of functionirg :
' lyeshta is considered to be an Active nakshatra. Once again, we will take help from the policing
profession to fathom Jyeshta's active nature. Being a policeman, one is expected to be ready and
alert 24 hours a day as they can be called anytirne for duty. It is a profession which involves constant
vigil, activity and responsibility. It is noticed that Jyeshta types usually get depressed when their
circumstances don't allow fior constant activity of some kind.
' 'L, ,+'- 4. "4tr1 
1i+ Jeu
Caste :
It belongs to the Servant caste. The servant caste was seen by the ancient seers as being
involved in different forms of seruitude. It is hard to understand why the supposed eldest among the
first eighteen nakshatras should be relegated to seruitude. The only reason we can think of is that
Jyeshta is not skilled in any particular art, trade or profession. It is like Indra, whose activities can't
be categorised under any of the four main castes Brahmin, lGhatriya, Vaishya and Shudra.Indra is
neither a priest, nor a soldier, nor a businessman and he is no manual labourer either. We have
already seen that Jyeshta types always end up in service professions like police officers, etc.
Qenfur.' ' '?sriJ:' 'iYl- ]r: i: -:ilr:il sJ:,
It is a Female nakshatra. Jyeshta is often portrayed as the eldest and seniormost queen. Even
Indra as a chamcter seems to have predominantly feminine attitudes and aftributes. The old, seasoned,
jealous, stern and lonely queen archetype fits Jyeshta like a 9love. 
*,
tso[yparts U 5{umor (Aytne{ic Corutitution) :
The neck and right side of the torso are the body parts related to this nakshatra' In a lot of
ancient cultures, the eldest queen was supposed to have the most elaborate neck ornamentation to
signiff her seniormost status. Even today in some parts of Africa, huge necklings are used for
signifying status. In some cases the neck are elongated by using larger and larger size necklings'

[page 270]
287
It is a primarily 'Vab" (airy) nakshatra. This again must relate to its relationship with Mercury
a primarily vata planet. Jyeshta, as we have seen, belongs to the air element. Its classification under
the Vata humor re-emphasizes its airy aspect.
Direction
It is related primarily to north and south.
ea[as (@nrters) :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 160 40' - 20" 00' Scorpio falls in Sagittarius Navamsa
ruled by Jupiter' The emphasis here is on family concerns and interests. This pada is very concerned
about financial affairs even though its prosperity in that area will swing from one extreme to the
other. The lesson here is to take a more easy going attitude in regards to finances. A certain enthusiasm
towards acquiring higher knowledge is noticeable here. The normally secretive Jyeshta tends to leak
out secrets through Sagittarian carefreeness and frankness. The native is a risk taker. Generosity is
more prominent in this pada in comparision to other Jyeshta padas. The native is chivalrous in terms
of being protective towards kith and kin. Planets here have a sense of humour. Sun, Mars, Jupiter &
Ketu are strong here and Jupiter tends to give the best results. Planets placed in this pada adversety
effect the wellbeing of one's siblings.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 20" 00' - 23 20'Scorpio falls in Capricorn Navamsa
ruled by Saturn. This pada is very rigid in regards to responsibility and doing the right thing. Natives
here are fiercely protective and like to challenge others. This pada produces authority type figures.
This pada can be selfish, stingy, materialistic and vengeful. The native is ruthless in regards to
getting back at others' A strong sense of maturity is seen in the physical and mental make-up of the
native from an early age. The native has an authoritative speaking voice. This pada is very serious
and overbearing and will tend to take its time to achieve its goals. The native usually only achieves
their goals late in life after much hardwor( perseverance and penance. Natives are cautious, slow

[page 271]
288
and stern. They need to watch a tendency towards too much skepticism, melancholy and negative
attitudes in general. Mars & saturn are strong here in the sense that they give some sort of position
of authority. planets placed in this pada adversely effect the wellbeing of younger siblings.
The third pada or quafter of this asterism 23o 20' - 26" 40'scorpio falls in Aquarius Navamsa
ruled by Saturn. This pada gives a strong humanitarian instinct and allows the native to play roles
which are beneficial or protective towards society. The naUve works best in professions which involve
protecting the underdog or underprivileged. They like serving causes. The native can be very sacrificing
when it comes to protecting others. This pada gives a love for researching science or mysticism. The
native has their own peculiar brand of family values. The native enjoys espousing their personal
philosophy to others. The native gets caught up in bizarre sexual encounters' saturn, Mercury
Venus & Rahu are strong in this pada. Planets placed in this pada adversely effect the wellbeing of
one's mother.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 26o 40' - 30o 00' Scorpio falls in Pisces Navamsa
ruled by Jupiter. This is a very emotional pada and the native is inclined to get carried away. The
native can simply drown themselves. There is a danger of too much indulgence in fantasy, sexual
intrigue and intoxication. The native may be able to channel their emotions into creative expression.
The native carries their sense of responsibility and protectiveness to an extreme at times. In its
lowest aspect, natives are apt to fantasize about their woes and troubles in life in an unhealthy way.
In its highest aspect, this pada can give a strong sacrificing nature and a spiritual devotion to
humanity. The native will be fond of children. The native will defend the rights of others and take an
interest in occult exploration for liberation purposes. The only downfall is that the penance aspect
which is so necessary for Jyestha 's proper functioning is difficult to harness in this pada. However
lyestha,s capacity for material gain is stronger in this pada and its poverty aspect is decreased' This
is true when strong benefics like Venus and Jupiter are placed here. Mars functions poorly in this
pada, however Saturn, although giving material adversity, may be helpful in acquiring some soft of
spiritual discipline. This pada tends to be the most self destructive, when working through its negative
aspect. .i:

[page 272]
289
{Profusiots :
All Policing Professions; Government Officials; Administrative Posts of all types; Reporters;
Radio & Television Commentators; Newsreaders; Talk Show Hosb; Actors; Orators; Firemen; Trade
Unionists; Occultists (mainly Black Magicians); Detectives; Mafia; Politicans; Beaurocrats; Naval
Professions; Forest Rangers; Military Professions in general; Salvation Army and other such 'Caring
for the Aged' professions; Manual Labourers; Athletes, especially Sprinters; Telecommunication
Irdustry related professions; Ar Traffic Controllers and Radar Experts; Surgeons.
9faru :
Hilly Inaccessible Terrain; Hot Tropical Jungles; Government Buildings; All places related to
Telecommunications & Media in general; Airports; Hospitals; Military Bases; Capital Cities; Manors,
Forb & Palaces; Old-Age Homes; All places connected with above-mentioned professions.
Qurw (tr-sserrce) and tattu.ta (Ekment) :
It is supposed to be a httuic nakshatra. This classification mainly relates to its elderly and
protective aspect. As we have discussed earlier, Jyeshta is reverential towards ib elders (or those
more powedul than itself) and is protective towards its juniors or subordinates. Jyeshta is also
sattwic in the sense that it is ready to sacrifice a lot of pleasures and enjoyments for the sake of its
duUes and commitments
It belongs to the Air element. This relates to Mercury's strong association with Jyeshta. Behind
its fixed and stern Mars exterior, Jyeshta is pretty light floaty and airy in disposition. Jyeshta hankers
for freedom and movement (which are natural qualities of the air element) but is usually constrained
by its outer image, responsibilities or circumstances. For example, a police officer may like to join
the crowd in a rock concert but he cannot do it because Of his job and position.

[page 273]
290
gora ('Typr) ,
It is considered a Rakshasa or Demonic nakshatra. It is a surprise to find that the nakshatra
whose ruling deity is king of the gods, is classified thus. A good look at stories and legends attached
with Indra reveal that Indra at times surpasses the demons themselves, as far as demonic or
unrighteous actions are concerned. Jyeshta's sense of right ano wrong can get quite flawed because
ofitsprimari|yse|fshandse|fcentreddisposition.'^;.':.:,}';i'|..'':'::
OriBntati"on U Dispositbn :
It is a Level nakshatra. Jyeshta's tendency to'get even' is the first thing which comes up in
regards to this classification. Jyeshta is always concerned with fair play, justice, balancing events
and people. A policeman pursuing a murderer is in essence fuelled by Jyeshta's basic nature to get
even. This'getting even'tendency is found in gangster mentalities like the Mafia. The heads, dons or
elders of Mafias are always playing the endless game of 'getting even'with each other'
It is a Hard, Sharp and Dreadful nakshatra. Just like the planet Mars, Jyeshta is not averse to
activities requiring the above mentioned qualities. Jyeshta carries within itself most of the keywords
associated with the sign Scorpio - hardness, coldness, focus, tofture, punishment, attacKing,
arduousness and biting. Jyeshta represents the hard, stony and ferocious side of the sign Scorpio'
Its brutality is well exemplified today by the police departments and the heads of organizations,
corporations and institutions all around the world'
Lunar'M0ftfr d Dau :
It relates to the first half of the lunar month of Jyaishtha. This usually corresponds to late May/
early June in the solar calendar.
Jyeshta is also related to the Saptami & Chaturdashi (7b & 14b tithis or days) of the waxing and
waning phases of the Moon's monthly cycle.

[page 274]
291
Attsryious Actiaitiet :
Harsh activities; Plotting; Spying; Scheming; Passing judgements; Getting even; Putting one's
foot down over impoftant issues; Taking control; Expressing one's authoritative nature out of a
sense of caring; Administrative activities; Policing or monitoring situations; Occult activities; Acting
responsibly; Acts of concern, care or protection; Associating with elders, especially giving assistance
to the elderly; Taking care of family matters; Occult activities requiring a lot of penance; Holding
discussions over serious issues; Grand planning; Acting restrained out of conslderaUon for others;
Setting disciplines for oneself.
Innuspiciotu Actiaitirs :
Wallowing in depression and resentment or having a hard done by attitude; Infidelity; Acts of
selfishness or self-centricity; Taking advantage of others; Marriage; Healing; Too much rest or
recreational activity; Any dealings which require a lot of tact, sensitivity and gentleness; Not good
for travelling
efanetny fo[er :
Mercury is the main planetary ruler of this nakshatra. Mercurial energy refines itself from its
deceptive, cunning, childlike beginnings to a more serious energy, which tries to control the scattered
functionings of the mind. Considering that Moon represents the mass mentality, Mercury's functioning
here is directed to controlling that energy. It is no wonder then that Jyeshta natives feel like the
police of the world.
Mars, the ruler of Scorpio, of course supports this policing mentality and provides the energy
and initiative required for it. The Mercury-Mars combination can turn self-seruing very quickly as the
martian energy afflicts the perceptive and discriminative part of mercurial energy. Much of the deceit
and misuse of power inherent in this nakshatra can be understood frcm the rnany tales about the

[page 275]
292
unruly, boisterous behaviour of its ruling deity Indra, the scion of the demigods. Mercury makes
Jyeshta a sort of a chameleon, whose values are not based upon any real understanding of things,
but are dependent upon its surroundings.
Pluto and Ketu, being co-rulers of Scorpio along with Mars, also convey a part of Jyestha's
energy in the form of self-destructive tendencies, outer and inner transformation, emotional upheaval
and penance.
Mercury-Mars & Mercury-Mars-Ketu conjunctions in a chart, carry similar energies to Jyeshta.
In the present day and age, most planets placed here need to be watched very carefully by the
astrologer as they usually work against the native's peace of mind. Only a well placed Mercury can
give good results here.
ilowefs and A[pfiabe* :
' The first pada or quarter of this asterism 16o 40' -20o 00' Scorpio corresponds to "No" as in
Nora.
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 20o 00' - 23" 20'Scorpio corresponds to "Ya" as in
Yani.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 23o 20' - 260 40' Scorpio corresponds to "Yi" as in
Yeast.
The fourth pada or quafter of this asterism 26o 40' - 30o 00' Scorpio corresponds to "Yu" as in
Yul.
In the Sanskrit alphabet Jyeshta corresponds to "Dha" and consequently its mantra is "Om
Dham".
;3ir-r "ii::;;' -.. r
I

[page 276]
293
Seryat type :
Its sexual animal is a Stag. A stag is an aggressive sexual animal, as compared to a deer, which
is the sexual animal for the previous nakshatra Anuradha. Jyeshta is supposed to have a cold, yet
aggressively, passionate response towards lovemaking and likes to dominate the proceedings. It is
not considered a very virile nakshatra even though it can get obsessive about sexuality.
For marital and sexual compatibility with other nakhatras please refer to the tables on pagqt
457 & 458.
'Esoteric :
Being the 18h nakshatra, Jyeshta reflects the meaning associated with the number'18'. It is
considered the culmination of Lunar energy. The tarot image associated with the 18th card,
appropriately called "The Moon", depicts a night-time scene with two dogs howling at two towers,
which form a gateway to a mysterious region beyond. A full moon hangs above on the horizon, while
a crayfish is attempting to crawl out of a small pool in front. This predominantly dark imagery relates
to a final confrontation with the hidden workings of the subconscious.
It is Jyeshta's task to constantly confront the mysteries, fears, illusions and pitfalls of the dark
realms of the left hand side of nature. Jyeshta has to bring order into the scheme of things through
the right use of the elemental forces. The catch here lies in knowing when to let nature take its
course and when to intedere. Indra, along with the other elemental gods like Agni (fire deity) and
Varuna (water deity), is always trying to keep the balance in terrestrial affairs through confronting
the dark demonic forces, who are repeatedly trying to disrupt nature's funtionings. The danger here
lies in folly, which arises out of an improper understanding of the Universal functionings. This is the
point where the next nakshatra, Mula, takes over and tries to gain a root understanding of Universal
functionings.

[page 277]
295
E4ampk :
Td Bundy, the famous serial killer, has his Moon placed in Jyeshta. His character brings out the
negative side of Jyeshta. Al Pacino, the Hollywood actor, who has played many cop, mafia and father
figure roles has his ascendant lord placed in this nakshatra.
J.Krishnamurthi, the celebrated philosopher, has his Moon placed in this Nakshafa. Despite the
many good things in his message, Jyeshta stubbornness comes out when he refuses to look towards
anything beyond material, for arriving at a complete universal understanding. It is interesting to
note that he suffered serious throbbing pain in his head for most part of his life. This was a result of
his conscious effort to not pay attention to his internal psychic processes happening atthe kundalini
level.
Misceffaneous :
According to Varahamihira, Moon in Jyeshta gives "an angry disposition, few friends, lustfr:lness,
contentment and a sense of responsibilty".
*:**

[page 278]
lf. fyfula O"O' - tl"Zo'$agiftarius

[page 279]
19.
fiYfuto
(00000' Sagittarius - 13020' Sagittarius)
rn tfu SKy ,
Mula, the first among the last nine asterisms, consists of a bunch of nine stars, which were
seen by the ancients as forming a shape simibr to a lion's tail. These nine stars are known in modern
astronomy as Lambda-Scorpionis (Shaula), Epsilon-Scorpionis, Mu-1-Scorpionis, Iota-1-Scorpionis,
Theta-Scorpionis, Eta'Scorpionis, Zeta-korpionis, lGppa-Scorpionis & tJpsilon-*orpionis (Lesth).
All of these stars lie in the end portion of the astronomical constellation of Scorpio, but astrologically
they form the part of the sign Sagittarius. Their location corresponds to the center of the Milky Way
which can be easily seen stretching across like a white river in the night sky. When we look at these
stars in the night sky, we are basically looking towards the centre of our galaxy. Shaula and Lesath,
having visual magnitudes of 1.53 & 2.68 respectively, are studded together and form the brightest
paft of this asterism.
Abme :
"Mula" translates into "the Root", "the Center" or "the Innermost Core". In our view, nothing
really needs to be said about this asterism's nature and functioning after its meaning is revealed.
Mula is straight, direct and doesn't like to beat about the bush. However, we nevertheless have no
option but to carry on with our dissection of its roots.

[page 280]
300
Syrnhot :
Its main symbol is a'tied bunch of roots'. Both its name and symbol emphasize the word'roof
and this asterism literally relates to the'root'of evefihing. The fact that the centre of our galaxy lies
in it conveys the same idea. Just like its planetary ruler Ketu, this asterism deals with getting to the
bottom/core of everything. In the trees and plants roots are usually hidden, which means that this
nakshatra deals with all kinds of hidden things, realms, events, motives, propensities etc. The tied
bunch of roots also symbolizes the restrictive aspect of this asterism'
The term'rcot'has another meaning in the word'rooted'. This nakshatra also relates to something
properly rooted. This gives a strong foundation to the actions of this nakshatra. Its symbol also
means collecting or tying up what belongs to one. Ketu, as we know, is the one who stores past
karmas and releases the ones ripe enough to be experienced !n the present life. It can help one
collect the necessary tools from the past, which one requires in fulfilling one's goal in the present
life. This is suggested by the symbolism of tied roots. Mula thus helps one put together in a meaningful
way one's talents, which have developed in past lives.
' Just as a tree! roots penetrate into the unseen realms beneath the earth's surface, Mula has a
fot to do with investigation into things unseen or unknown. Along with its counterpaft Ardra, (which
lies directly opposite in the zodiac), Mula has the strongest and deepest sense of inquiry amongst all
the nakshatras.
In ancient medicinal systems like Ayuruda, roots of various plants are used for medicinal
purposes, thus Mula is directly associated with making medicines. In the same way, Mula also relates
to the root of diseases, ie. micro-organisms like viruses, bacteria etc. Just like everything under
Mula's jurisdiction, these micro-organisms are invisible to the naked eye.
Finally, the fact that the roots are tied suggests an idea of constraint and limitation. As a result,
Mula often does not allow too much freedom or scattering away of energies and makes one delve
deeply within a limited sphere. In fact Mula is the most pinpoinbd in approach in comparison to the
other nakshatras.
r-; ;i. lii

[page 281]
301
Deitg
Its presiding deity as per Vedic texb is the Goddess of dissolution and destruction known as
Nritti, a name which translates into 'calamity'. She is supposed to be the daughter of Adharma
(unrighteousness) and Hima(violence) and the mother of Mityu (death) and Bhaya (fear). Some
texts also mention Nritti as a destructive demon, and some texts see her as Alaxmi, the opposite of
Laxni (gddess of wealth, abundance ard prosperity).
In light of the above, it is not hard to see that this is not a very pleasant nakshatra. However,
werything is not doom and glmm with this nakshatra. After all, it lies in the luckiest among the signs
Sagittarius, which in turn is ruled by the greatest benefic Jupiter.
In the author's opinion, Mula is a very powerful nakshatra, even on the material plane. It can
give worldly status, prosperity etc. The only thing is that it usually takes it all away from the native
in question at some point. This, however, is not uncommon in the sense that death takes away all
these things from everyone anyways.
Nritti shouldn't be seen as a goddess of povefi, misfortune and calamity. In fact, her nakshatra
represents the peak of material achievement and the beginning of the spiritual impulse. Mula is the
19h nakhatra and '19' is a very lucky number for all types of material achievements,
Just like lGli, the fierce form of Paruati, her destructive aspect is always constructive in some
sense. Her nakshatra promotes non-violence and all other such virtues after a proper understanding
has been attained.
A{ature d functioning :
Mula's primary approach to life is to get to the root of things. It is a relentless nakhatra which
will stop at nothing until it has exercised its will. Obviously not all natives under a strong influence of
Mula are this extreme, but they do try to fully uUlize whatever willpower is available at their command.

[page 282]
302
It is in Mula's nature to quickly cut out and destroy things that have lost their value. It is a very
impulsive nakshatra. Much more often than not, it regrets its actions in hindsight. Only when its will
is in tune with the Universal will, does Mula function in a wise Jupiterian way. The struggle between
individuality and universality reaches its peak here, as individuality is at is peak expression.
The process of individualization begins in Aswinl lionizes in Magha and culminates in Mula. The
completed individual seeks experiences beyond the domain of ego and selfcentredness. Having said
this, Mula is still quite a proud and haughty nakshatra. Mula natives, however, are unable to
comprehend their own power and abilities. In some cases, this is a good thing, as their ability to
inflict damage upon themselves and others is restricted by their ignorance.
Its dreadful and demoniac side comes from the negative functioning of Ketu in its lower aspects.
It is a powerful asterism which can give dominion and lordship. This can sometimes breed ego,
vanity and arrogance which can lead one to perform abominable and demoniac actions. Rauana and
l6msa, two main villainical characters in Ramayana and Mahabharafa respectively, are associated
with this asterism. They started harassing and killing without discrimination after gaining influence
and power. This asterism can give power and influence, as it follows the nakhatra known as Jyeshta
or the Eldest, which signifies the height of material accomplishment. This asterism relates to the
state after one has successfully conquered the material realm.
Among the body parts, it relates to the feet, which emphasizes its capacity to take heavy
responsibility, just as the feet take up the load of the body. As suggested by the symbolism of tied
roots, it helps one put together in a meaningful way one's talents, which have developed in past
lives. Although it may sound bizarre, it also promotes non-violence and protects the good. It is also
a magical nakshatra, which either confers magical powers or helps those in need in sudden magical
ways. This asterism gives both good or bad results in a blazing explosive way. It is usually triumphant
in all sorts of wafare, but a downfall does take place at some point of time.
Natives with Mula relating to the ascendant have prominent noses, ears and thick lower lips.
They can't be classified as attractive in the general sense of the word, even though they have a
peculiar magnetism, especially in the case of highly evolved souls. It is usually quite easy to spot

[page 283]
303
Mula types in a crowd. They usually display one form of arrogance or other in their dealings with
others. Sarcasm, boldness and reservedness go hand in hand in Mula's behavioural patterns. There
is a tendency to overtly dramaUze or underplay situations. Mula natives have peculiar ways of
looking at any given situation, which often puts them at odds with those around them. A degree of
over-eagerness is seen when it comes to taking drastic actions or measures to resolve situations or
problems. Their special talent lies in getting to the root of any matter at hand without any unnecessary
beating about the bush. However, this straightforward, direct approach lands them in tnouble when
their judgement is skewed.
Mo[p of furctioning :
Mula is considered to be an Active nakshatra. Mula is essentially a seeker on all planes of
existence. Just like the sign Sagittarius, it is very proactive in this seeking. It is its active nature
which makes Mula more scary in comparison to the other demonic and tamasic nakshatras. As we
have discussed earlier, Mula doesn't waste too much time in converting thoughts into actions. Since
rllost of Mula's activities like death are feared, not many people are able to creatively harness its
active energies.
Caste
It belongs to the Butcher caste. This obviously is in reference to Mula's destructive quality. It is
Mula's job to cut away anything which has outlived its usefulness. There are different types of
butchery eg. a man cutting up animals in an abattoir, Kali cutting off demon's heads (refer to the
image) or an ascetic cutting off his desires and attachments. Obviously we can see that there is a
sense of right and wrong here and not all butcheries are bad. Death, which is essentially cutting the
cord between the astral and physical body, is a kind of universal butchery which in a way is a
liberating and regenerative process.

[page 284]
304
Qenler :
It is a Neutral nakshatra. As far as gender is concerned, Mula represents the neutral aspect of
Ketu. This is why its presiding deity is sometimes seen as a goddess and sometimes as a male
demon. After all, the centre of the galaxy and the root of all things cannot have a gender bias.
tso{yparts U trtunor (Ayuruedic Constitution) :
Among the body parts it relates to the Feet, which emphasizes its capacity to take heavy
responsibility, just as the feet take up the load of the whole body. It also relates to the left side of the
torso,
It is a primarily 'Vata" (airy) nakshatra. Trying to understand this classification is like trying to
understand the nature of a black hole. One would expect Mula to be a primarily Pitta (fiery) nakshatra
considering its connection with Ketu, Jupiter and Sagittarius. We will however try and give a small
explanation here:
The Vata humor is directly connected tothe pnna (astral life force) in the body.The process of
breathing is the essential dividing line between life and death. Since Mula relates to only the root
processes, it has to relate to the Vata humor.
Direction :
It is related primarily to Southwest, NorthWest, Northeast and East. However it is mainly
connected with the "cenFe" or the "middh"'
estras (Qwrters) :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 00o 00' -3o 20' Sagittarius falls in Aries Navamsa ruled
by Mars. This pada relates to all types of deep searches and probes. These can take place on
material or spiritual planes depending upon the evolutionary status of the naUve in question. The

[page 285]
305
outlook here is hopeful and optimistic if Ketu is well placed. A certain degree of enatic egotism and
selfcentredness can be noticed when this pada is working through its lower aspect. Planets, especially
Moon, when placed in this pada are supposed to be harmful for the wellbeing of the father. Sun,
Jupiter, Mars and Ketu are sfong here.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 30 20' - 60 40' Sagittarius falls in Taurus Navamsa
ruled by Venus. This pada has both occult and material implications. It can make one hardworking
while pursuing material objectives. This same resoluteness and tenacity is seen when planets here
concentrate on realms beyond material. A certain creative spark is seen when it comes to arts, music
and other Venusian pursuits. Planets here usually cause some soft of strife and obstacles. They give
bad results for the mothert well being. Jupiter, Mars, Moon and Venus do well here.
The third pada or quafter of this asterism 60 40' - 10o 00' Sagittarius falls in Gemini Navamsa
ruled by Mercury. This is the word play pada. In a way this is the most light amongst Mula's padas.
The focus here is on communication, wordplay and relationships. Mula's need for dominion is
transferred onto an intellectual plane. At their best, planets here can create a balance between
material and spiritual values. This pada is generally against money and material acquisition of any
sorts. Affiicted planets here can cause dire poverty'. Jupiter, Mercury Rahu and Ketu can give good
results here.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 10o 00' - 13o 20' Sagittarius fulls in Cancer Navamsa
ruled by Moon. This is the most tumultous among Mula's padas. There's a constant struggle in trying
to bridge the emotional realm with other planes. The emotional nature is too easily disturbed in this
pada. The best option for the natives under the strong influence of this pada is to sacrifice their
emotions for higher goals. According to ancient texts, this pada is harmful for the general wellbeing
of a native and some propitiatory rites are required to harness its energy properly. Jupiter is the
planet which is most conducive for channelling the energy of this pada.

[page 286]
306
lhofusioru :
Shamen, Medicine men, Healers; Doctors and other such people who administer poisons, shots
and vaccines; Dentists; Ministers, Preachers; Police Officers; Detectives and Investigators; Judges;
Hitmen & Soldiers; Researchers, especially in the fields of Microbiology & Genetics; Astronomers;
Morticians and those who perform Autopsies; Orators & Public Speakers; All professions involving
oratorical abillty like Mass Leaders, Rock Musicians etc. ; Debators & @ntrarians; Those involved in
Selling Herbs, Roots & Root vegetables like carrots, potatoes etc. ; Bodyguards; Wrestlers; Homicide
squads; Politicians; Those practising Tantra (especially Aghoras), Voodoo practitioners & Black
Magicians; Nuclear Physicists; Mathematicians; Professional Agitators; Gold diggers & Treasure
Hunters; Horse Trainers &allthose involved in Equine Sports; Psychotherapists; Astrologers; Ascetics;
Mining; Coal & Petroleum Industry; All professions involving investigation of any kind; Professions
involving destructive activities.
Pfaru :
Deser6; High Mountain regions where special herbs are found; Dense rainforests & other such
inaccessible places; Frozen deserLs like Antaftica; Bottom of oceans, lakes etc; Hidden subterranean
caves; Earth's core & all layers beneath the Earth's suface; Small isolated islands & places; Big
institution buildings; Supreme Courts & other coutts of justice; Abattoirs; Cremation Grounds and
Cemeteries; Places connected to Death & Death Rituals; AgriculturalWasteland; Wargrounds; Drought
areas; places where mass calamities have taken place; All places connected with the abovementioned
professions.
guno ('Esserce) on[ tattwa (Ekment) :
Itis a Tamasicasterism in the sense that it relates to the dark and passive aspect of nature.
Thus it can 6;tuse all softs of confusion, paranoia, fears etc. , which fall in the domain of Ketu's
signific:tions. It also deals with all types of smoking and intoxication.

[page 287]
307
It belongs to the Air element. This is again a puzzling classification, as Mula is more sffongly
connected to fiery planets and signs. Since the air element is directly connected to the Vata humor,
the readers can look up in the Body Pafts & Humor section for an explanation.
jana $ype) :
It is a Rakhas or demonic nakshatra. It is a powerful asterism which can give dominion and
lordship. This can sometimes b'reed ego, vanity and arrogance, which can lead one to do aborninable
and demoniac actions. The two Titan kings, who are the main characters in the two main Vedic
historicaf texts, Rauana and l6ma, are associated with this asterism. They started harassing and
killing without discrimination, after gaining influence and power.
,;5:+ .,t. *:
Orientation U Dbposition :
It is a Downward nakshatra. Since roots grow down into the ground and not upwards, it makes
sense that Mula is classified as a downward nakshatra. Mula, as we know, has energy which is
always trying to move towards the centre or inner core. It involves digging, whether it be fur earthly
beasures like gold or petroleum, or more impoftant things like enlightenment.
It is a Hard, Sharp and Dreadful nakshatra. Its sharpness relates to the sharp and often harsh
way Ketu functions. This relates more to the destructive aspect of Ketu. Sometimes sharpness is
necessary to initiate an impoftant change and wake us up from our sleep. It is an intense nakshatra
which initiates spiritual transformation. For understanding its hard and dreadful side, all one needs
to do is look at its image.
{.uaor MontfrA Daq :
It relates to the second half of the lunar month of Jyaistha, whictr usually falls in June.

[page 288]
308
Mufa is also related to the Prathama & Chatufthi(l$ & 4s tithis or days) of the waxing and
waning phases of the Moon's monthly cycle.
Arupiciotu Artiuitir^s :
Any activity involving getting down to the root of a matter; Activities involving gathering together
of knowledge, people etc; Singing, oratory and all activities requiring forcefulness and dynamism;
Good for administering herbs & medicines; Suitable for planting, gardening and other agricultural
activities; Suitable for laying foundations for houses, construction work, buying and selling homes;
Good for expressing sexuality; Favourable for adventures; Good for getting even by cutting the
chase; Favourable for contemplation, self-exploration & self-assertion; Favourable for meditation on
death and fierce deities llke lGli; Good for iniUaUon into occult realms & study of sciences like
astrology.
Inruspiciaus Actirtitits :
Does not favour any activity involving balance, tact, diplomacy; Not good for initiations or
beginnings pertaining to materialistic matters; Unsuitable for marital ceremony; Especially unfuvourable
for borrowing or lending money and financial transactions in general.
lPfanetary fu.hr :
Mula combines the energy of Jupiter and Ketu. Ketu is the main ruler of this nakshatra. Being a
destructive asterism, Mula relates to the destructive potential of Ketu. Ketu's destructiveness is
always benign in the sense that it either initiates a new beginning or a spiritual transformation. Ketu
is the planet signifoing the root underlying impulses of all thoughts and actions. It is also a planet
which gives access and insight into the unseen realms as well as the invisible causes of visible things
or events.

[page 289]
309
Jupiter's involvement with this nakshatra makes sure that transformations under Mula happen
for the better. Although it may sound bizarre, Mula also promotes non-violence and protects the
good. It is a magical nakshatra, which either confers magical powers or helps those in need in
sudden magical ways. Ketu loses much of its power to give bad results when associated with Jupiter
in any vyay. In its negative aspect however, Jupiterian energy can foster and expand the wildly
destructive and. idiosyncratic tendencies of Ketu. Mula is a strong energy, which can either produce
a benevolent sage or a demonic enUty wanting to conquer everything.
Mula's fieriness relates to the fiery aspect of Ketu. Ketu, as we know, is a predominantly fiery
planet. Through this asterism it gives both good or bad results in a blazing explosive way. Its fierinecs
makes it favourable for war and other similar activities. It is usually triumphant in all sorts of warfare
but a downfall does take place at some point of time. Most prominent generals and military leaders
have impoftant planets placed in Mula.
Adolf HitlerSchart is a glaring example of the negative ramifications of the combined functioning
of Jupiter and Ketu. He is one of the few people to have Jupiter-Ketu conjunction in Mula, which
allows for a complete expression of the tremendous power inherent in this nakshatra. It is Jupiter's
task to guide the Ketu energy in a wise and beneficial way. This is usually only achieved when the
energies of Jupiter and Saturn are harmonized properly in a nativity (in Hitler's chaft Saturn didn't
aspect the Jupiter- Ketu conjunction, allowing for an uninhibited expression of the darker demonic
energies of Mula).
Jupiter-Ketu conjunction carries Mula energy. A well placed Sun, Mars and Jupiter do well in
Mula. Ketu almost always gives some eltreme idiosyncratic tinge to the naUve, despite being very
strong in its own nakshatra.
'Iloanfs an[ A[pftabe* :
Yale.
The first pada or quarter of this'asterism 00o 00' -3" 20' Sagittarius conesponds to "Ye" as in

[page 290]
310
The second pada or quafter ofthis asterism 3o 20' - 6o 40' Sagittarius corresponds to "Yo" as in
Yoga.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 6o 40' - 10o 00' Sagittarius corresponds to "Bha" as in
Bhang.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 10o 00' - 13o 20' Sagittarius corresponds to "Bhe" as
in Bhesh.
In the Sanskrit alphabet Mula corresponds to "Na", "Pa" and "Pha" consequently its mantras are
"Om Nam", "Om Pam" and "Om Pham".
Sereut type and Co.nryatihifity :
Its sexual animal is a Dog. It is more of a howling hound dog, rather than a Scottish terrior
(pfease refer to the image). It is most compatible with Ardra, the other dog nakhatra.
For sexual & marital compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the tables on pages 457
& 458.
Esoterb :
Mula is the first among the asterisms which symbolizes the spiritual journey of the soul. It
fof lows Jyeshta (the 18b Nakshatra), which is the last among the second series of asterisms dealing
with materiaf involvement and accomplishments. Even the two Titan kings, Rauana and lGma,
were finally initiated on a spiritual path after they were defeated in batUe by the two incarnations of
Wshnu, Rama and Krishna respectively.
The spirituality which Mula brings about is different from that of the previous nakshatras, in the
sense that Mula goes for the'root'of everything. In spiritual terms, this means that Mula settles for
nothing less than the absolute merger with Paramatman (universal soul). Mula goes about this

[page 291]
311
process through many extreme ways - sometimes it discards everything using the principle of Neti
Neti (not this, not this)' At other times, it goes for accumulating immense power in the three lokas
(heaven, earth and the netherworld). It then misuses this power so that root deities like Vishnuhave
to personally intervene. In this interuention lies the key to its salvation.
The third way relates to the goddess lGti. on this path Mula goes after and destroys the
demons and negativities within, without procrastination or mercy. Once this is done only attwa
remains and liberation is just a mere formality. Through this path Mula devotes itself to being a tool
of the universal mind, rather than being a wayward rebel. The lifestory of Anjaneya (commonly
known by his other name Hanuman), an incarnation of Shiva and a devotee of Rama (an incamation
of Vishnu), reveals the true spirituality of Mula.
Mufa's association with the centre of the galaxy relates itto Bnhma, the creatoramong the
Trinity' Mula thus derives its power from this understanding of the original process of creation.
Being the 19h nakshatra, it relates to the number 19. '19'is seen as a solar number. which
signifies both beginning and completion. '19'has the power to stand before the spiritual.sun, because
it has gone beyond the mundane lunar functionings, which reach their culmination in the number
'18" It is its association with the number 19 which gives Mula power and prosperity on a material
plane, even though its presiding deity Nritti is supposed to be averse to material abundance and
prosperity.
Qotra (Cettstiat Lineage) :
This nakhatra is related to the Sage Pulasthya, one of the seven celestial sages looking after
the affairs of our galaxy' The name of this sage translates into "having smooth hair',. pulasthya
appears to be a two sided sage. His lighter more benevolent side is expressed through his connection
with Mrigashira and llttaraphalguni, while his connection with Mula and puruabhadrapadareveals a
destructive aspect concealed underneath the benign posh exterion

[page 292]
312
fume[iat : .
For those suffering from bad resulUng from afflictions to this nakshatra, the best remedial
measure is worship of fierce deities like Kaliand Rudra. Contemplation and meditation on death in all
its forms leads to constructive uUlization of Mula energy'
RepetitiOn Of the rOOt mantras Of this nakShatra - "Om Nam", "Om Pam" and "Om Pham" 108
times when Moon transits this nakshatra and in its corresponding lunar month, is sure to reduce
zuffering and bring enlightenment into a person's life. "Om Eshte Nirate Bhagastam Jushsva" can be
recited to cure the bad effecb associated with Mula's first three padas.
persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this nakshatra can also increase the
good effects through the above mentioned.ways. It is helpful for them to wear a milture of black,
red & golden colours or earth tones. They should use its directions, lunar month and the days when
Moon bansits Mula to undertake all important actions.
E4amp[e:
Rauana, the mightiest Titan king and sorcerer of Treta Yuga (Silver Age) was born with his
ascendant lord Sun placed in Mula. As narrated in the famous historical texl, "Ramayana'f he gained
immense power and lordship over the three worlds through hard penances aimed at pleasing $rlia.
This shows Mulat ability to gain power on a universal level through a close association with the root
forces. He however fell prey to the haughty, bashful and unwise aspect of Mula energy and met his
end as a villian in the hands of Rama, the / incarnation of Vishnu'
Hanumanor Anjaneya,the incarnation of the llh Rudra(celestial deities presiding over universal
afFairs) in monkey form in the abovementioned Treta Yuga, was born with Mula rising. His power
surpassed even that of Ravana but he always selflessly offered it to righteousness, which in his Ume
was represented by abovementioned Rama,

[page 293]
313
Misce[lanzous :
According to Vanhamihira, Moon in Mula makes one "haughty, rich and happy besides giving a
fixed, luxury loving and compassionate disposition".

[page 294]
20. furvu"h.du I t" Zot - 26'+0' $agittaius

[page 295]
20.
!fu.tvasfralfio
(13020' Sagittarius - 26040' Sagittarius)
In tfu Skg t
Puruashadha, the pinnacle of Venusian energy, is represented in the celestial firmament by.
three bright stars, known in modern astronomy as Epsilon-Sagittarii (Kaus Australis), Delta-fugittarii
(Kaus Media) & Epsilon-fugittarii (Kaus Borealis). All of these stars lie in a line (with a slight deviaUon)
in the middle portion of the constellation Sagittarius. These stars can be spotted easily, as they are
located close to the Milky Way as it stretches like a white celestial river across the night sky. Kaus
Australis, having a visual magnitude of 1.81, is the brightest among these stars. Ancient Vedic seers
saw these stars as forming the shape of a hand held fan.
Afamc :
"Purvashadha" translates into "the Former Invincible One" or the "Former Unconquered". Its
name, like its successor, concentrates on the basic attribute of this asterism - invincibility.
The alternative name for Purvashadha is 'Apanjita", which translates into "undefeated". We
can see UEt thb name goes along the same lines as the more commonly used name.

[page 296]
318
-rlF-
Sym6o[ :
In congruence with the shape formed by its stars, a 'hand held fan'
is the most famous symbol of this asterism. A fan can have four uses:-
1. As a decorative item popular in Japanese/Oriental cultures'
2. To cool oneself down in hot conditions'
3. To fan up a fire.
4. As a mask to hide oneself.
Its first use relates to the showy, gliEy and glamourous Venusian aspect of this nakshatra. In
the ancient Orient, the type of fan one carried was directly related to social status. This conveys the
superiority aspect of this nakshatra. It finds itself superior in comparison to all nakshatras before it
especially the earlier Venusian ones. The superiority of perfection achieved in the Venusian realm
will however depend on the soul level of the native in question.
The second use corresponds to this nakshatra's ability to get through hard times. Fanning is
essentially an act of aggression against heat. Thus this nakshatra is often associated with all kinds of
aggressive activities. It is patient in adversity and aggressive whenever the oppoftunity arises.
The third use corresponds to this nakshatra's ability to keep a thing going. In its negative aspect
this may manifest as exaggeration or over expansion. In its positive aspect it is an inspiring energy
whictLKnows how to keep the fire burning. As a result it is a very expressive and expansive nakshatra.
I
The fourth use relates to this nakshatra's ability to conceal facts, informations, feelings, personality
etc. It is in a way a shy and sensitive nakshatra, which likes to conceal its enthusiasm and bubbliness
from the outside world as much as possible. Only after some initial reluctance and when it begins to
gain confidence does it show its true colours' : :
,J ,-: ;.; -r'i 1.,,

[page 297]
319
A'winnowing basket used for ridding grain of husksi is an alternative symbol, which more or
less conveys the above mentioned meanings for a winnowing fan. This symbol brings out the aspect
of this nakshatra related to uncolering hidden talents. This nakshatra is capable of shedding outer,
unnecessary obstacles in order to bring out the useful part inside. This may relate to people, places
or things.
Deity :
An obscure goddess by the name of Apah is the ruling deity of this nakhatra. "Apah" translates
into "water". Very little is known about this goddess, as the surviving vedic texts don't mention her
name much. However, her obscurity makes sense, when seen in the light of the fact that this
nakshatra has a mysterious, hiding, secretive and shy quality about it.
Apah can be equated with the ocean goddesses of other cultures like Aphrdite, Astaftes etc.
It is interesting to note the "Aph" similarity in the names "Apah" & "Aphrodites". They seem to share
the same roots as the name of the original celestial ocean "Apas'l Even Purvashadha's alternative
name 'Apanjita" seems to have been derived from the same root. "Apa" is still the name for water
in many languages around the world and many of the ancients saw wats as the invincible elenent.
"Apah" and "Aphrodites" are both Venusian goddess figurines and can be seen as the female
counterpafts of the male ocean deity "Varuna". Both of them can be seen as part reflections of
Laxmi, the universal goddess of prosperity. Laxmi is the spouse of Vishnu, the overseer of the
celestial waters which sustain our universe. The image of Vishnu and Laxmi sitting on a snake bed
on top of the ocean of celestial waters is an image which is directly related to this nakshatra.
The 'churning of the ocean legend' (refer to the author's previous work 'The Rahu-Ketu
Experience" Sagar Publicationsfindia, "The Key Of Life" Lotus Press/uSA) in which various treasures
came out, signifo the productive potential of Apah as a goddess. Her negative side is reflected by the
deadly poison that came out as a result of the churning. Apah relates to the churning which goes on
inside each one of us and the good and bad things which come out as a result.

[page 298]
320
Her flambouyant, enticing, invincible approach is reflected in the nature and functionings of
puruashadha. Like all primordial forces, Apah, though benevolent, is often cruel and harsh in her
ways, which again can be seen to hold true for those having a prominent Purvashadha personality.
Her grand, all-inclusive, all-embracing vision is where Venus derives its higher qualities like real love
and compassion from. Purvashadha is the pinnacle of Venusian energy and thus the real aim of this
nakshatra is tq ggt to an all-encompassing level of awareness, at least from a Venusian point of view.
Apah is closely connected to the mythical sea creature now commonly known as mermaid. The
qualities usually associated with mermaids like vain, alluring, sensitive, beautiful, mysterious, enticing,
musical, fteedom loving and adventurous can be applied to this nakshatra as well' It is interesting to
note that J/mi Hendrix(amusician with Puruashadha rising on his Ascendant), wrote a song dedicated
to mermaids titled "1983, A Merman I should turn to be", He also wrote lines like "Blue are the
lifegiving waters taken for granted, they quietly understand. "
A Welsh folKale illustrates the same concern and reverance this nakhatra has for water' In
that folk tale, "a mermaid who had spent three days with moftals on dry land, upon returning to her
kith and kin, was asked what she had seen amongst those on land. She replied, "Nothing much,
except that they are so ignorant as to throw away the very water they boil their eggs in' "
Afature 6 funttioning :
The one characteristic which sets Purvashadha apart from all other nakshatrcs is its intense
conviction that'it can't lose'. Puruashadha feels that it has the ability to come out on top in wherever
it direcbs its energies. As we have seen, there is a strong notion of invincibility attached with this
nakshatra. This notion can however be misplaced at times like the famous character of Don Quixote.
Most of the qualities readily associated with the sign Sagittqrius - leaps of faith, ambitiousness,
adventurous spirit, wild exuberance, philosophical zeal, wanderlust - usually stem from the nature
and functionings of this nakhatra. It is one of the most optimistic nakshatras, but its optimism does
not have the tinge of impatience, It is always ready to bide its time until the wind blows in its favour.

[page 299]
321
It is completely undaunted by setbacks and doesn't ponder on failure. At times this is a negative
quality, in the sense that it hardly ever learns from its mistakes.
Many a times one finds that natives under the strong influence of Puruashadha have unrealistic
hopes, ambitions and goals unless there are other balancing factors in the horoscope. For example,
Adolf Hitler, who has Moon placed in Puruashadha, stafted a war with unrealistic aims way beyond
the power of hls army and resources. Purvashadha has a straight fonruard driving "just do if'type of
energy, which doesn't always take evefihing into account, especially the feelings and concerns of
those around them. This makes this nakshatra an insensitive one and even cruel in some situations.
This is why this nakshatra is associated with declarations of war and other such actions which bring
about deshuction followed by sorrow and regret.
It has a cautious side to it in that it is dow to jump into new things and experiences, but once
things are set in motion, it is the type which almost always ends up going overboard. At their best
Purvashadha natives are an inspiration to those around them. In their presence one begins to realize
that the universe is not such a bad place after all. Purvashadha natives usually have a fresh and
unique approach to things, which has the power to instill life into the heart and minds of those who
are not as bfessed. Jyesflnis unhappy because it does not know the root of things. Mula makes one
find the root and the centre, but it is only Purvashadha which holds the key to joy and happiness,
after the centre has been found.
Puruashadha is the nakshatra which can be most associated with the joy of living. This doesn't
mean that Purvashadha natives cling onto life like Ashlesha natives. It is just that they like to live
each moment to its complete fullness without a care for the past or the future. They have a nonchalant
attitude towards misery and thus are never phased by adverse circumstances. Obviously much
depends on the overall tone ofthe chaft as well, but the basic energy of Purvashadha is to shrug off
adverse circumstances just like a fan shrugs offthe misery caused by heat. As we can see, Purvashadha
has a strong desire to live a good life and so the natives under its influence are always trying to
improve their circumstances. It is usually seen that Puruashadha natives have little formal education

[page 300]
322
and often have to rise from depravity or generally unpleasant circumstances in order to enjoy their
"good life". Improvement of circumsbances is the main concern for them.
They are the kinds who like to be exuberant once they have achieved their goals. At times this
rlay seem like a show-off to other people, but in most cases the Puruashadha natives are only acting
out their inner nature. They are born natural show-oft. Much depends on the refinement of Jupiter
and Venus in the cfrart in terms of how their exuberance expresses itself.
In general, Purvashadha has a pleasant, artistic way of looking at things. They carry a certain
proud and serious expression on their faces, but are ever ready to break into a smile or laughter.
Their demeanour 63n change from jovial to serious in the twinkling of an eye. You can't always tell
their inner thoughts from their outer expressions. They can be honest at times but they always like
to keep a part ofthemselves secret, just as the ocean gods and goddesses like to have a mysterious
touch about them. They have a flambouyant way about themselves which reflects through their
dressing, communication and their work. One marked characteristic of Puruashadha is that they
usually don't fare well at formal education and are often seen dropping out of schools and universities.
In the universal scheme of things, Purvashadha relates to "varchograhan shakti" - the power to
bring about invigoration. Its symbolism has strength above and connection below. This imagery
emphasizes the rejuvenation potential of the waters of life, which Purvashadha stands for. Just as
the bathing process cruses a renewal in our daily lives, the waters of cosmic consciousness bathe us
internally so that most of our soul level hufts and confusions are washed away'
Modz of functionW
purvashadha is considered to be a Balanced nakshatra. It is very unlikely for a Purvashadha
native to overextend themselves, even in their n1?sic pursuits. Jupiter and Venus, as planets, are
not known to have an extreme attitude regarding activity in the same way that Sun or Mars does'

[page 301]
323
Caste :
It befongs to the Brahmin caste. This is one of the most evident classifications as puryashadha
is only related to the two brahmin planets, Venus and Jupiter. Purvashadha has a tendency to go for
the most cushy positions or modes of existence available at any given time. In today's times,
Puruashadha would rather take up the brahminical profession of being a rock star todayl purvashadha
likes to maintain its position at the top of society and have a luxurious existence with the minimum
of effort.
Qen[er :
It is a Female nakhatra. This obviously relates to its ruling deity, Apah, being feminine, and the
fact that Venus is seen as a predominantly feminine planet.
tsodyparts (t t{umor (Ayuvedb Corutitution) :
Thighs and Back (from neck to waist) are the body parts related to this nakshatra.
It is a primarily "Pitta" (fiery) nakshatra. This classification relates to purvashadha,s location
within the predominantly pitta sign of Sagittarius. We have already talked about the fiery aspect of
this asterism.
Directinn :
It is related primarily to the directional arc ranging from noftheast to southeast, via east.
Potras (Qmrters) :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 13o 20' - 16o 40' Sagittarius falls in Leo Navamsa and
is ruled by Sun. This pada relates to the proud and confident side of Purvashadha. The spiritual urge

[page 302]
324
is strong here and is accompanied by a strong sense of ethics. Planets placed here like to bring
limelight in the issues related to them.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 160 40' - 20" 00' Sagittarius falls in Virgo Navamsa
ruled by Mercury, This pada relates to the intellectual, alchemical aspect of this nakshatra. A lot of
hard work is required here, but there is also the promise of great spiritual or material accomplishment.
Barring Venus, planets placed here aid one's career in one way or the other'
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 20o 00' - 23" 20' Sagittarius falls in Libra Navamsa
ruled by Venus. This pada relates to the easy going, luxury loving Venusian side of this nakshatra.
The emphasis here is on reaping the fruits rather than working hard. This is a Pushkara Navamsa
pada and barring Sun, planets posited here give good material results and promote all types of
partnerships and group related activities.
The fourth pada or quafter of this asterism 23" 20' - 26" 40' Sagittarius falls in Scorpio Navamsa
ruled by Mars. This pada relates to the haughty, secreUve, hidden and mysterious aspect of this
nakshatra. Herein lies the two extremes, great occult wisdom or material perversity. Planets posited
here are good for occult attainments and foreign affairs'
{Profusioru :
Hypnotists & Psychic Mediums; Sailors; Navy Personnel; Marine Life Experts; Shipping Industry;
Fishing professions; Professional Hosts & Hostesses; Entedainment Industry; Rock Stars; Professional
Motivators and Inspirers; Teachers & Preachers of Motivational Philosophies; Managers of all types;
poets, Writers, Aftists, Painters; All industries processing raw materials especially liquids; Refineries;
War Strategists & Weapons Experts; Costume Designers; Fashion Experts; Hair Dressers; Para jumpers;
Hot Air Balfoonists; Flying profession especially in regards to civilian transpott; Beauticians; Herbalists;
Those working in Amusement parks; All professions associated with water and liquids in all its forms.

[page 303]
325
Qfncu :
oceans; Lakes; Aquarium Parks; Swimming Pools; Docks, ports; shipping yards; Temples; Boats;
High Class Estates; Air ports; Luxury Islands & Hotels; Beauty Salons; Amusement Parks; Art Galleries;
Music Conceft Halls; Places where pompous functions & high society gatherings are held.
Quna ('Essenre) anf,Tattuta (Efzrunt) :
It is supposed to be a Rajasic nakhatra. This fits well seeing its planetary ruler, Venus, is a
primarily Rajasic planet. Purvashadha is a worldly energy in the sense that it can satisff one's desires
on a materlal plane through relentless activity. It is a sucker for the good things in life.
It belongs to the Air element. We have to go back to the fan imagery to understand this
classification. In at least two of its functions, fan requires the involvement of air. Whether it is
fanning the fire or alleviating oneself ftom the heat, the air element @mes into play. After all it is air
which keeps the fire burning and Purvashadha is a nakshatra which is most adept at keeping the fire
burning.
$ana (Typd '
It is considered a Manusha or human nakshatra. Just like the human race, Purvashadha is a
mixed up nakhatra displaying an e)dreme spectrum of good and bad qualities. Its human quality
makes it very interested in terrestrial affairs. It is no wonder then, that 70o/o of our planet is made up
of oceans and 70o/o of our bodies are made up of water.
Ori"entatint d Disposition :
It is a Downward Looking nakshatra. Just like Mula, Purvashadha relates to all things which are
hidden from view. When we look at our bodies, we can't really see the water in them, even though
they are 70olo water. Purvashadha's ruling deity Apah is supposed to reside under the surface of the

[page 304]
326
ocean. It is Purvashadha's tendency to hide, which makes it a downward or under the surface
nakshatra. One has to dive down to pick up the pearls of Purvashadha'
It is an tJgra (fierce and severe) nakshatra. As we have already seen, Puruashadha is associated
with all types of aggressions like declarations of war. It is Purvashadha's naivete of acting without a
care for consequences or repercussions, which makes it a dangerous nakshatra. It is quite a volatile
nakshatra, which is very hard to control once it has caught fire. It presses on with its severe actions
even after it has realized the futility of them'
Lunar Montfr U Da4 :
' It relates to the first half of the lunar month of Ashadha. This month usually corresponds to late
lune in the solar calendar.
puruashadha is also related to the Trayodashi( 13u' tithi or day) of the waxing and waning
phases of the Moon's monthlY cYcle'
Attspicinus Artitities :
Facing issues which require courage; Taking a strong stance; Confronting enemies and opposition
along with reconciliations and forgiveness; Settling debts; Going to war; Inspiring and inciting others
into action; Renewal and revitalizing one's energies, goals and actions on the mental, spiritual,
emotional or physical planes; Adventures including exploration into nature and sporting activities;
Creative pioneering; Travelling over water, visiting water places and activities connected to water;
Sailing and other water sports; Confidence boosting strategies; Worshipping female goddess energies;
Showing off; Acts of bravery; Good for equine activities; Aftistic peformances; Decorating oneself
or one's surroundings to spice it up; Visiting ancient sites; Spiritual & occult initiations/attainments;
Favourable for agricultural activities; Good for marriage and invigorating sexual activity; All activities
connected to its Professions'

[page 305]
327
Inuupitioru Actiuitits :
Unfavourable for activities requiring tact and diplomacy; Not a time for calm reflection;
good for endings unless the ending promises a brighter future or higher step up the ladder;
especially good for land journeys.
9fanetary fo.kr :
Venus is the main planetary ruler of Puruashadha . Venus reaches its highest individual energy
as a planet in this nakshatra (its peak expression however comes through Revati, where it reaches
maximum exaltation).
Puruashadha is the power and purity of the childlike mind, which is represented by Jupiter in
the form of faith and wonder. It is the child which stands before the universe. It is the power of
renewed life that never grows old. That is why Mercury the etemal youth, is intimately associated
on the esoteric plane with this nakshatra. Wherever there is Venus to bring back life from the dead,
there is Mercury behind it. The combination of MercuryVenus and Jupiter is the Alchemist's secret.
Alchemy first takes place in this nakshatra before reaching its completion in Revati (27h nakshatra).
Purvashadha is the initiate of the occult mystery schools, Jupiter in this case being the student of
Venus and Mercury. Everyone has to be blessed by Venus and Purvashadha to enter this school.
Therefore Mercury has to function well with Vcnus in a horoscope for any type of real occult
attainments.
In general astrological terms, Jupiter-Venus, Mercury-Venus, Jupiter-Mercury-Venus conjunctions
carry an energy similar to that of Purvashadha. Mercury-Venus & Jupiter-Venus exchange also carry
Purvashadha energy.
Besides Saturn, all planets usually do well in Purvashadha. Unless afflicted, even Saturn would
do well in its 2nd and 3'd padas.
Not
Not

[page 306]
328
iloank and A[pfia.hets :
The first pada or quarter of this asterisrn l:lo 20' -16o 40' Sagittarius corresponds to "Bu" as in
Bootis.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 160 40' - 20o 00' Sagittarius corresponds to "Dah"
as in Dahl.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 20o 00' - 23o 20' Sagittarius conesponds to "Bha" as
in Bhatt.
The fourtr pada or quarter of this asterism 23" 20' - 260 40'Sagittarius conesponds to "Dha" as
in Dharma.
In the Sanskrit alphabet Purvashadha corresponds to "Ba" consequently its mantras are "Om
Bam".
Seryat type and Compatihi[ity :
Its sexual animal is a Monkey. This makes it very playful in regards to sexual activities. It is most
compatibfe witt Shravana, the other monkey nakshatra.
For marital & sexual compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the tables on pages 457
& 458.
lEsoteric :
Afl of the matter written below came to my wife Vela, in a dream. A goddess (which we cttn
presume to be Apah or Laxmi), revealed the esoteric secret behind this Nakshatra.
'The'life giving waters'of Puruashadha is the'elixir'of life, the key to immortality sought after
in the Alchemical mystery schools. In this nakshatra, the initiate of the ancient mystery schools
becomes the bride of heaven. Being ttre highest expression of Venusian energy, it is the ultimate

[page 307]
329
union with what is above. When one hears the shadowy echoes of the ancients through the walls of
their ancient temples, one is listening to the voices of immortality inherent in Purvashadha, that
which lives on after death. When someone listens to the feedback of Jimi Hendrix3guitar, (who has
Purvashadha rising on his Ascendant), one is again listening to the immortality aspect of this nakshatra.
This is the 20h nakshatra. '2' represents Venus and the harmonising of two elements or two
signs. '0' is the humber of completion and infinity. Puruashadha is thus the infinity aspect of the
Venusian energy. Purvashadha is the harmonising of Mercury/Venus and Taurus/Gemini, the two
signs which form the gateway to the constellation of Orion.'2' relates to the second sign of the
zodiac Taurus and '3' represents Gemini, the third sign of the zodiac. This is why those who are bom
on the 23h day of the month carry some of this Purvashadha energy. Mrigashin, the constellation
which lies across the Taurus/Gemini axis also carries some of Purvashadha's energy.'2'is the feminine
goddess energy, represented by the Moon. She is the 'Tsis" mysIery,the High Priestessinlhe Tarot
deck, the revealer of secrets and possessor of those secrets unrevealed. These secrets belong to the
high initiates of the ancient mystery schools. This is why Mercury's role with Purvashadha is hidden
from view. This hidden role is seen by the fact Gemini is placed opposite the sign of Sagittarius in the
natural zodiac.
The seventeenth card of the Tarot deck known as "The Star", relates most closely to Puruashadha's
energies. The female figure in the card expresses eternal youth and beauty and she pours the
waters of life from heaven onto the earth. The motto of this card 'waters of life freely'speak for
itself in regards to its relation with Purvashadha."
Qotra (Cetutiot Lineage) :
This nakshatra is related to the Sage Pulahu, one of the seven celestial sages looking after the
affairs of our galaxy. The name of this sage translates into "connector of space". puruashadha,s
relationship with connectivity can be gleaned from the adhesive and connective role water plays in
our bodies' Purvashadha relates to the same connecting force which holds space together in muc6
the same way as it holds the water droplets together in the form of an ocean.

[page 308]
330
fume[ial :
For those suffering from bad effects resulting from afflictions to this nakshatra, the best remedial
measure is to worship Goddess Laxmi, and other Venusian deities like Lalita and Tripurasundari.
Repetition of the root mantra of this nakshatra - "Om Bam" 108 times when Moon transits this
nakhatra and in its corresponding lunar month is sure to reduce suffering and bring enlightenment
into a person's life.
Persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this nakshatra can also increase the
good effects through the above mentioned ways. It is helpful for them to wear ornate and decorative
garments and jewellery in variegated pastel colours. Mixtures of white, light pink and light blue are
ideal. All psychedelic colours go well with the energy of Purvashadha. One should use its directions,
lunar month and the days when Moon transits Purvashadha to undertake all impoftant actions.
E4antp[e:
The fegendary French heroine of the 15h century Joan of Arc, has her Ascendant lord Mercury
placed in Puruashadha, and her atmakaraka Moon placed in Mercury's sign Virgo. Moon carries the
childlike qualities of this nakshatra, making her the Virgin Saviour child. The lord of Puruashadha,
Venus, the 12b lord, is placed in her 8b house, ensuring her name lives on after death.
Misce[atuous
According to Varahamihira, Moon in Purvashadha "makes one have a loving and proud spouse
while the native is of 'a proud disposition and steady in friendships".
***

[page 309]
1
fi'i
*b"
*
€
',lg*rr
€
zt. O*ar."h"d. 26"10' $agih+adus - lo"oo' (apficom

[page 310]
2L.
ilttarasfiala
(2604o' Sagittarfls - 10000' Capricorn)
In tfu Sky t
lJttarashada, the pinnacle of solar energy, is represented in the celestial firmament by four
bright stars, which the ancients saw as resembling an elephantt tusk. In modem astronomy they
are known as Sigma-fugittaii('Asella), Tau-Sagittarii, Phi-Sagittarii&Zeta-Sagittarii(Nunk).The51-
four stars lie in the end portion of the astronomical constellation of Sagittarius. However it must be
noted that this asterism's influence extends into the first ten degrees of the zodiacal sign of Capricorn
as weff . Nunki, having a visual magnitude of 2.07, is the brightest among them. According to the
legend, these stars correspond to the celestial area where the godly forces got their final victory over
the demonic forces.
Afuitu :
"Uttarashada" translates into the "Latter Invincible Ohe" or the "Latter Unconquered". This
meaning reveals the crux of this asterism, which has more to do with the term "final victory" than
any other asterism. It also reveals that it forms a pair with its predecessor Rtruashadha, in the same
way as Puruaphalguni and Uttaraphalguni form a pair.

[page 311]
334
Synhot:
Its primary symbol is an 'elephant's tusk'. The tusk is the most prized paft of an elephant's
anatomy. Elephants are usually very conscious of their tusks and zealously guard them. Researchers
have found that the type, colour and size of the tusk has something to do with who becomes the
leader of an elephant tribe. It follows that Uttarashadha has a lot to do with leadership issues.
Beside ornamentation, the tusk is useful to elephants for only one practical purpose - fighting'
lust like its predecessor, Purvashadha, Uttarashadha has a lot to do with aggressive actions like
declarations of war. As mentioned earlier, Purvashadha and Uttarashadha form a pair and some
scholars regard the tusk of an elephant as a symbol for Purvashadha as well. They see the left tusk
as belonging to Rrmshadha and the right tusk to Utarashadha.
In most ancient cultures where elephants were known, they were used as symbols of royal
insignia. All kings, including Indra, the king of the gods, were supposed to ride on elephants during
processions and sometimes even during warfare, Uttarashadha, therefore, has a direct relationship
with kingship and all the responsibilities it entails. In a way, 'responsibility' is the most important
keyword for this nakshatra.
For obvious reasons, an elephant's tusk is also regarded as a symbol of penetration. It signifies
penetrating mental insight and the ability to enter new fields of endeavour. It also conveys a certain
sense of fearlessness and a go ahead spirit.
Deity :
uttarashadha has ten ruling deities known as the Ten Vishvadevas. Vishvadevas means Universal
Gods. The names of these ten celestial beings translate into - "Goodness", "Truth", "Willpower",
"Skill", 'Time", "Desire", "Firmness", "Ancestors", "Brightness" and "Peak". It is clear that all these
ten gods are extremely benevolent and are representative of the primary virtues of the original,
divine, creative spark. They can be said to be the guardians of all that represents the word "good" in
the universe. In the sarne way, Uttarasfndha represents all that is good and benign on Q9r planel

[page 312]
335
All the qualities expressed through the names of the Vishvadevas find expression through
Uttarashadha. This is what sets Uttarashadha apart from Purvashadha, even though most of
Purvashadha's qualities and functionings apply to it as well. As a result of qualities like willpower and
firmness, Uttan*radha has far greater permanence than its predecessor. It is easy to see that all
these qualities are borne out of honest introspection, which makes Uttarashadha more introspective
in comparison to the extroverted, flambouyant Purvashadha.
It is interesting to note that one of these gods is named "Ancestors". This must relate
uttarashadha to traditions as well as onet forefathers (see Magha). Uttarashadha is the first nakshatra
which tries to encompass the qualities of all its predecessors (Dhanishta and Reuatt do the same).
One can associate will power with Ardra and Krittik4 skilfulness with Hasta and Cltifr*4 time with
Bharani and Anuradha; desire with Bharani, Rohini, Mrigashira and Ashlesh4 Goodness with Aswini
Purnavasu and Pushyq, Truth with Uttaraphalguni Firmness with uttaraphalguni, Vishakha and
lyestha Ancestors to Magha; Brightness wtth Rohini, Mrigashira, Pumaphalguni and Chitr4 asfi
Peak with Mula and Puruashadha.
Ganesha, the elephant headed God, is the final presiding deity of this nakshatra. Ganesha is the
only deity with an elephant's head. ihe story behind his getting an elephant's head reveals a lot
relating to Uttarashadha's essence (refer to the Esoteric Section). Ganesha is always poftrayed as
having a full right tusk and a cut left tusk. This symbolises that Uttarashadha has a more complete
and coherent energy in comparison to its mate Purvashadha. Ganesha can thus be seen as being
strongly connected to both Ashadhas. Ganesha is seen as the "Lord of Beginnings" and "Remover of
Obstacles" and his blessings are sought in all beginnings. Uttarashadha therefore relates to all kinds
of beginnings. It is seen that activities started under the positive influence of this nakshatra are
blessed with success and permanence.
A@ture d functionirq :
Many of Magha's qualities like elegance, traditionalism, authority and respect for couftesies are
similar to Utbarashadha. However, Uttarashadha has a more positive, introspective and enduring

[page 313]
336
aspect. It shows a person of very good qualities who may be valued for their advice. It gives a talent
fur commencing new enterprises and seeing them through to completion. It is a very practical and
pioneering type of energy as most of its quafters fall in the practical and achievement orientated
sign of C-apricom. It is a nakshatra very concerned with structures, order and makes one adhere to
activities and behaviour which are seen as respectable and sometimes conformist.
It's assotiation with the ancestors shows a deep respect for traditional values and a desire to
advocate these values in one's behaviour and life. However the Saturnine influence on this nakshatra
can make a pe6on rigid and harsh, just as the piercing symbol of the elephant's tusk suggests. It
can show an intolerance for anything which does not follow normal respectable lines. Spiritual and
philosophical motivations are directed towards finding practical solutions to life's problems
The sexual animal of this nakshatra, the mongoose, is one of the few animals rvhich can defeat
a snake. In a way, Uttarashadha can be seen as the very opposite of all that Ashlesha stands for'
Since they are placed opposite each other (6h / 7h / 8h house relationship), there is open enmity
and warfare between these two nakshatras. This nakshatra has little tolerance for underhanded or
deceptive influences. However the mongoose is cunning in its own way and its symbol suggests that
one is courageous and clever in finding ways t0 forge ahead in difficulL dangerous or complo<
situations. Natives under the strong influence of Uttarashadha tend to gravitate towards or attract
situations in life which represent a lot of challenges. On a spiritual level it makes one very determined
to pierce through the veil of illusion to uncover one's true soul nature.
In the universal scheme of things, lJttarashada relates to "apradhrishya shakti" - the power to
give permanent victory. Its symbolism has achievable goals above and the strength to achieve those
goals below. This imagery is self-explanatory. The only thing wofth mentioning is that this strength
is not personal strength, but the collective strength which comes about due to an alliance with the
higher forces of good, when one is wholeheaftedly and unselfishly trying to establish righteousness
over unrighteousness.

[page 314]
337
Mode of ftmtioning :
Uttarashadha is considered to be a Balanced nakshatra. This self evident classification does not
require too much commentary. A centre is needed for any kind of balance and Uttarashadha, amongst
all nakshatras, relates most closely to this centre, from both a universal and personal perspective. It
is said that the "road to excess leads to the palace of wisdom", but one must remember that this
palace of wisdom has balance as its foundation,
Caste :
It belongs to the Kshatriya (warrior) caste. This nakshatra is mostly concerned with attaining a
place of position or strength in society. As we have already seen, it relates to leadership and the
ruling cfass. According to Manu (the lawgiver for our planet), all kings and leaders came under the
khatriya caste. Uttarashadha has brahminical tendencies, but they often seem to manifest within a
kshatriya framework, A good king is akin to a sage, but is still not a sage. In fact Janakis the only
eafthly king to have been awarded a brahminical title (refer to the Vedic legend 'Tlre Ramayana').
Qen{tr :
It is a Female nakhatra. This classification defies all common sense as all of Uttarashadha's
ruling deities and planetary rulers are male. The only way we c:rn comprehend this is by considering
the fact that all the ten good qualities are seen in a feminine light in Vedic texts. Vedic texts regard
all qualities as being paft of "nature", which in the end is considered to be the feminine principle of
the absolute. Uttarashadha is a nakshatra which has more to do with the benign functionings of
Maya rather than the mab observer esspnce of the Absolute.
Bodyparts U Humor (Ayulefic Constitution) :
Thighs and Waist are the body parts related to this nakshatra.

[page 315]
338
It is a primarily "l6pha" (watery) nakshatra. Elephants (closely associated with this nakshatra)
are supposed to be the main representatives of the kapha humor. Kapha is a constitution, which is
derived from the combination of earth and a little bit of the water elemenL The earth element is
provided by the sign Capricom (which most of Uttarashadha lies in) and the little bit of water
element is provided by Jupiter (part of Uttarashadha falls in Sagittarius, Jupiter's sign).
Direction :
It is related primarily to south, west, nofth-east and east.
lPadas (Qurters) :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 26" 40' - 30o 00' Sagittarius falls in Sagitbarius Navamsa
and is ruled by lupiter. Righteousness, confidence and o<pansiveness are the hallmarks of this pada.
Nothing seems impossible when one is working through the energies of this pada. It has supreme
faith in its ability, knowledge and understanding. Being both a pushkara navamsa pada and a
vargottama pada, planets placed here give strong material/spiritual results. Sun, Jupiter, Mars and
l(etu are especially potent here. Jupiter gives the best results. i
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 00o 00'- 3o 20'Capricorn falls in Capricorn Navamsa
ruled by Saturn. The emphasis here is on concretization and material expression of one's thoughts,
plans and desires. Planets placed here give nerues of steel. Most of the issues of this pada circle
around one's own self and personality and how it is expressed in the outer world. It is the goal rather
than the means which becomes important here. An exaggerated attention or attachment to worldliness
and power struct'tres can be noticed. Mars and Saturn have the ability to best utilize the energies of
this pada.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 30 20' - 5o 40' Capricorn falls in Aquarius Navamsa
ruled by Saturn. The emphasis here is on accumulation, whether it be knowledge or material
possessions. A strong attachment to the concept of family can be noticed in this pada. Planets here

[page 316]
339
give good results if one works towards one's goals through involving other people. Group and team
work are essential for the proper functioning of this pada. Rahu, Mercury and Saturn feel comfortable
in this pada. Saturn gives the strongest results.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 6o 40' - 10" 00' Capricorn falls in Pisces Navamsa
ruled by Jupiter. This pada promotes physical prowess, short travels, courage and philanthropy.
There's a constdnt conflict between material and spiritual values as the native strives to achieve a
balance. In the present times, more often than not, materiality praails. Planets placed here give
abundant energy for pursuing one's goals. Moon , Mars and Satum seem best equipped to handle
the energies of this pada.
lProfusinu :
Preachers, Priests; Counsellors; Astrologers; Lawyers (of an ethical nature); Judges; Government
officials; Psychologists; Military Professions; Equine professions; Pioneers; Explorers; Wrestlers, Sword
fighters and other combat sports; Athletes; Elephant trainers; Business Executives; Organizers;
Defense Industry; Authority figures of all types; Teachers; Guards, High class Servants; Bird watchers
& enthusiasts; Body Guards, Security Personnel; Rangers; Hunters; Construction Industry; Cricketers;
Holistic Physicians; Politicians (as good as they get in the present day and age); All professions
requiring a sense of responsibility and ethics.
gtnr.es :
Prairies; Flat Savannahs; Mountainous Forests; National Parks; Wildlife Sanctuaries; Bird
Sanctuaries; Reseruations; Government Buildings & Grounds; Courts; Temples, Churches and other
religious buildings; Universities; College Campuses; Military Bases; Traditionalistic Towns & Citres;
Elite Gentlemen Clubs & Societies; Sports Stadiums; Cricket Grounds; All professions mnnected with
the above places.

[page 317]
a0
9r* ff-ssence) anf tattan (Efement) :
" It is supposed to be a gttwicnakhatra. The sattwic and benevolent nature of this nakshatra
can be seen cleady through its ruling deity, the Ten Vishvadevas'
It belongs to the Air element. This definitely must relate to its connection with the airy planet
Saturn. Besides ether, air is the most all encompassing element. Uttarashadha, which has more to
do with responsibility, equality and justice, has to have an all encompassing framework to manifust
its ten golden qualities.
Qana EWd '
It is considered a Manusha or human nakshatra. The fact that its ruling deities are known as
Vishvadevas, coupled with the fact trat Vishua is one of the common terms used for terrestrial
affairs on our planeq reveals the intensive involvement of this nakshatra wiilt human affairs on the
earthly realm. It is said that one can only truly understand and develop the ten qualities associated
with Uttarashadha in a human birth. It is for this reason that a lot of astral beings like demi-gods are
vying for earthly incarnations under suitable conditions.
Orientotion d Dispositi"on :
It is Upward nakshatra. All upward nakshatras are considered Sood for things which grow or
progress over time. We have already mentioned that all activities commenced under the positive
influence of Uttarashadha grow in leaps and bounds and achieve permanence. Another way of
looking at it is that Uttarashadha takes its cue from up above.
Itis a Dhruva(fixed or permanent) nakshatra. If there is any nakshatra which can be considered
as the.doyan of permanence', it is Uttarashadha. In fact all the qualities associated with the character
Dhruva (son of a demon king who was an ardent worshipper of Vishnu), are the same as those
belonging to Uttarashadha. In honour of this character, the pole star was known t Dhruvatara in

[page 318]
341
Vedic texts. In the same vein, one can understand that Uttarashadha is the pivot of good qualities
around which the game of lifu revolves.
Lunar Montfr U Day :
It relates to the second half of the lunar month of Ashadha, a period which uzually falls in late
July in the solar calendar.
Uttarashada is also related to Purnima (15th tithi or Full Moon day) of the waxing phase of the
Mmn's monthly cycle.
Auspi^cioru Actiaitizs
Planning new beginnings; Laying out plans for anything; Initial plans for any activity; Beginning
things anew; Laying foundations; All spiritual/religious activities & rituals; Putting one's affairs in
order; Activities requiring great discemment and correct judgement; All types of Business affairs;
Signing Contracts; Promotions; Acting authoritatively; Artistic Ventures; Marriage; Sexual Activity;
Entering a new residence; dealing with authority; Public, Politicalor Legal matters; One of the best
nakshatras for initiating any kind of activity.
Inauspicious Actiaitits :
Unfavourable for travel; Not good for concluding matters/endings. Uttarashadha is generally
good for evefihing except committing unlaMul activities. Unethical, rude, impehrous and primiUve
behaviour is not allowed here.
efanetary fr,g[cr :
Sun is the main planetary ruler of this nakshatra. The solar principle, which was bom in Krittika,
reaches ib zenith in this nakshatra. Theoretically it is suffice to say that the Sun does not exist after

[page 319]
342
this nakshatra, It means that the soul's ability to effect its surroundings reaches a peak in this
nakshatra. In its highest aspect, the individual will is completely tuned with the universal will and
thus allthe actions on a worldly plane are taken without the involvement of ego and selfishness' The
sense of right and wrong which is required here is not related to personal human laws but to the
divine laws of the universal mind. This is the nakshatra where the ego and individuality is sacrificed
for the sake Qf the greater good.
Since this nakshatra lies in the signs Sagittarius and Capricorn, Jupiter and Saturn have a
strong relationship with it. We can note that Jupiter and Saturn also rule the four padas of this
nakshatra. The combination of expansive Jupiter and contractive Saturn signifies moderation and
practicality. Since Jupiter reaches maximum debilitation in the Capricorn paft of this nakshatra, it is
implied that this part of the nakshatra is not suited for too much hope, idealism, expansiveness or
outer religious displays and rituals. In simple language, this is the place for action, not words. The
concrete practical action, which takes place here, shapes the material world according to universal
laws.
lupiter/Saturn, Sunpupiter, Sun/Saturn & Sunfupiter/Saturn conjunctions carry energies similar
to Uttarashadha. Planets Mercury Venus and Jupiter, unless operating from their higher aspect, can
make one too materialistic if placed in the Capricorn part of this nakshatra. All planets when placed
in this nakshatra, are prone to excessive and misplaced idealism, unless the individual will is working
in harmony with the universal will. Every error one makes under the influence of this nakshatra is
magnified, due to the enormous capacity of this nakshatra to influence the material wodd'
'lowek and Atpftabets :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 260 40' -30o 00' Sagittarirs conesponds to "Be" as in
Beth.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 00o 00' - 3" 20' Capricorn corresponds to "Bo" as
in Bohemian.

[page 320]
343
The third pada or quafter of this asterism 3o 20' - 60 40' Capricorn corresponds to "Ja" as in
Jardine.
The foufth pada or quarter of this asterism 26o 40' - 10o 00' Capricorn corresponds to "Ji" as in
Jimi.
In the Sanskrit alphabet Uttarashadha corresponds to "Bha", consequently its mantra is "Om
Bham".
Serynt'lype m"d CampatiSi[ity :
The sexual animal related to this nakshatra is the Mongoose. Uttarashadha is not very sexual in
the first place, which is clear from the fact that the mongoose has no compatible sexual animal
amongst the otlcr nakshatras. To put it simply, sexuality is not Uttarashadha's domain.
For sexual & marital compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the table on pages 457
& 458.
Esoteric :
The legend of the birth of Ganeha carries within itself all the tragedy, valour, divinity, esotericism,
enforced sacrifice, renewal and regeneration inherent in Uttarashada. In shoft the story goes like
this:-
" Paruati $eated a mind borne son and instructed him to stand as a guard and not to let anyone
in while she was bathing. Her husband Shiva, returning home, was barred entry by parvati's son.
Shiva had not seen this boy before and did not know who he was, and the boy in turn did not
recognize Shiva. Harsh words were exchanged and a battle erupted. Shiva could not defeat this boy
and had to retreat. He felt humiliated after being defeated by a mere child and sought the help of
Vishnu and other Gods to defeat the child.

[page 321]
344
In the bat1e that ensued, all of the Gods together were unable to defeat him. Vishnu finally
came up with a plan that someone should fight with the boy from the front, while he flew from
behind to stealthily take the mace out of the boy's hand. Vishnu's theory was that the boy couldn't
be defeated until the mace was taken out of his hand. The plan worked, as Shiva was able to cut the
boy,s head with his trident as soon as Vishnu's vehicle Garuda (celestialeagle) snatched the mace'
Since he was paruati's mind borne son she immediately came to know of his death and the
whofe story flashed before her mind's eye. She became enraged and summoned all the Shaktis
(feminine forces) of the universe to create havoc on Vishnu, Shiva and the rest of the Gods. The
whole creation went completely haywire and all the Gods were scared out of their wits. Vishnu
realized that the whole universe would collapse if Parvati was not appeased quickly. This could only
be done if the boy was brought back to life.
Vishnu instructed the Gods to descend on earth and bring back the head of the first thing they
saw. They saw an elephant and swiftly returned with its head. Vishnu and Shiva attached the
elephant's head to the trunk of the boy's body, which resurrected him. Finally Parvati's anger subsided
and order was restored in the universe. The boy was named 'Ganeshai which translates into'the
leader of all tibes', and was gii,en the boon to be worshipped first before any other Gods."
As the 21* asterism, Uttarashadha relates to the number 21. According to the ancients the
number 21 is called'The Crown of the Magl. The'Crown'here obviously refers to the seventh sacral
centre, ghastrara, which is the final resting place of the kundalini. The Pythagoreans see it as a
special number because it is a multiple of the two sacred numbers 3 and 7, We know that there are
three channels lfu, Pingalaand Sushumn4 which carry the lifeforce within our astral bodies through
the seven sacral centres. 21 can be seen as a summation of the passage of these three channels
through the seven sacral centres. Uttarashadha therefore relates to perfection on all levels, physical,
mentalryrd spiritul.
ln the Tarot Deck, the 21d card is "The Woild", which is seen to represent the whole earthly
plane of existence with all its complexities and diversities. It also represents perfection and finality

[page 322]
345
from a universal perspective. We can easi! relate this symbolism with Uttarashadhars ruling deities,
"The Ten Lords or Overseers of the World".
Qotra (Cettstiat Lineage) :
This nakshatra is related to the Sage Kratu, one of the seven celestial sages looking after the
affairs of our galaxy. The name of this sage translates into "the inspirer". In a way, inspiring others
is one of the main functions of Uttarashadha, as its own goodness sets examples for others to follow.
Since the Sage Kratu is associated only with benign nakshatras, we can infer that he has a similar
role in celestial circles.
fume[ia[ :
For those suffering from bad effects resulting from afflictions to this nakshatra, the best remedial
measure is worship of Ganesha, the remover of obstacles and bestower of wisdom.
Repetition of the root mantras of this nakshatra - "Om Bha" & "Om Bham" - 108 times when
Moon transits this nakshatra and in its corresponding lunar month is sure to reduce suffering and
bring enlightenment into a person's life.
Persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this nakshatra can also increase the
good effects through the above mentioned ways. It is helpful for them to wear all orange, yellow and
light blue colours and whites. They should use its directions, lunar month and the days when Moon
transits Uttarashadha to undeftake all impoftant actions.
E4prnp[c :
SwamiVivel<ananda was born with Uttarashadha rising on his Ascendant. He exuded the ten
sterling qualities associated with Uttarashadha's ruling deities through his personality and works.

[page 323]
Misceffmuous :
According to Varahamihira, those born with Moon in this nakshatra are "modest, graceful,
grateful, fortunate, abide by dharma and have many friends".

[page 324]
ZZ. $hravana lO"oO' fapricom -Zr"ZO, (aprlcom

[page 325]
22.
Sfiraooru
(10000' C-apricorn - 23020' Gpricorn)
In tfu Sky t
Shrauana, the apex of lunar energy, is represented in the celestial firmament by three bright
stars in the constellation known as Aquila (the Eagle). In modern astronomy these stars are known
as Alpha-Aquilae (Altair), Beta-Aquilae (Alshain) & Gamma-Aquilae (Tarazed). These three stars can
be seen huddled together on top of the constellation of Capricorn. Altair, having a visual magnitude
of 0.93, is one of the brightest objects in the night sky making Shravana a very easily visible asterism.
According to the puranic legends, these stars correspond to the three steps taken by Vishnuin his
Vamana-auatar.
9r{g:me :
"Shravana" translates into two very unrelated terms - "hearing" and "the one who limps". The
limping meaning is in obvious reference to Vishnu's three steps (please refer to the story below in
the Esoteric Section); while "hearing" as we shall discover, forms the crux of what this asterism is all
about.
Its alternative name is "Ashvattha", a term used for the sacred Pipat tree (Ficus Religioa). In
vedic texts, this tree is always given extraordinary significance. It is worttrwhile to mention that
Buddha received enlightenment meditating under this tree.

[page 326]
350
Sytrtot :
There are three main symbols for this nakshatra. One is a 'row of three uneven footsteps',
which as we can see from the nakshatra's image, are represented by its constituent stars. These
three steps were supposed to be taken by Vishnu in one of his incarnations, the purpose of which
was to establish order in the universe through the restoration of the heaven to the gods and earth to
the human beings. We will discuss this story in more detail when we discuss the esoteric aspect of
this asterism. These three steps can be seen as the threefold law through which the cosmic intelligence
maintains order in the universe. Nature, as we know, operates in three modes and this threefold law
relates to the three interactions between these modes.
A'tridenf is the alternative symbol of this asterism, which once again reiterates this asterism's
connection to the number'3'. Most numerologists know that'3'is the number of communication and
is the energy responsible for establishing order in the universe. This is why all ancient cultures had
three main deities responsible for overlooking universal affairs.
An'ear'is a commonly used symbol for this asterism, whidt we can see is derived directly from
its name. The communication aspect of this asterism is therefore more focused on listening than
speaking. Listening is the one and only way one can learn anything. To emphasize this aspect, some
wise men assigned three ears as its symbol. The reader can see that in the nakshatra's image the
tree is'full of ears'. In the ancient Indian Vedic tradition, knowledge was orally transmitted and so
(shruti), the power of listening, automatically became the most important quality an individual could
possess. It is because of these oral transmissions that Vedic knowledge is availabb today in its
pristine state. From this we can conjure that this asterism has a lot to do with preservation, in
keeping with the nature of the sign it falls in. When a native has a strong Shravana influence in their
horoscope, the astrologer can safely advise that person to learn to listen more to others, or pay
attention to one's inner voice in order to grow or progress in life.

[page 327]
351
Deity :
Vlshnu, the preserver among the Trinity, is the main presiding deity of this asterism. His
relationship with this nakshatra is already established from the symbolism and mythology associated
with this nakshatra. It is because of this strong relationship with Vishnu that this nakhatra gets its
strong organizational ability, which is normally associated with the sign Capricom. In keeping with
Vishnu's nature, this nakshatra likes to bring order through tact and cleverness and in many a case,
through any which way possible. It allows one to be able to listen, assimilate and contemplate on a
problem to arrive at the solution. Like Vishnu, this asterism does not believe in hurrying with things
and is ready to sit and wait urtjl the tine is ripe.
Saraswati, the goddess of learning, is also strongly associated with this nakshatra, even though
very few scholars acknowledge this fact. This nakshatra is not all about listening. It is also related to
speech and the ability to put learning into words. Someone has to speak for someone to listenl rhis
relationship with Saraswati connects this nakshatra to the use and study of languages, music and a
fascination for all media connected with education. '];
Afature (t functbning :
On a positive level Shravana is an amicable nakshatra, which tries to be reasonable and keep its
peace with its surroundings. It is calculative, but in its higher expression this calculativeness does
not have selfish motivations' Even its stubborn, unyielding nature is directed towards a higher cause
in its positive aspect. It is a persevering nakshatra which doesn't like to leave things in the middle or
undone. This is probably the reason why it is said that any activity started in $j9,1,arcfratra always
reach its completion.
In its negative aspect, all its qualities like perseverance, shrewdness and knowledge are used
for purely selfish means. Its power to listen, learn and teach meaningful things is usually lost in
gossip, backbiting and manipulation. Since it is a very goal oriented nakshatra, it becomes dangerous
when its goals are unwholesome and unethical. Narrow-mindedness is one of the strong traits to

[page 328]
352
emerge out of the negative functionings of this nakshatra' This nakshatra requires toning down of
the ego, as listening without preconceptions is the only way to learn' There is always a danger with
this nakshatra that a person under its influence may not always learn the right things' A person born
under a strong influence of this asterism should always be very careful of the company they keep'
There is always some foolhardiness attached with Shravana' The native can easily fall prey to deception
and bad advice. "1 t;' :.ii3;
In its highest level of functioning, this asterism relates to acquiring universal knowledge and
apptying it to bring about order in the material world. It usually bestows very strong powers of
erudition and sagacity. Oratory and other forms of lecturing come naturally and effortlessly to such
natives. In the present times, much of the organizational ability of this nakshatra has been used for
destructive and degenerative ends. This asterism is connected to all forms of media and in today's
world most of the media is used for propagating falsehood, lies and devoluting influences'
shravana is a socially active nakshatra which revels in public dealings' It has a very business
like approach to things, even though maintaining cordiality is its primary objective' If this nakshatra
is rising on the Ascendant, the person is likely to be mature in their approach, cunning, well mannered
and receptive with an alert look' The appearance is a mix of Moony softness and Saturnine rigidity'
Such people are usually clever in conversation and are skilled at putting others at ease quickly' In the
present day and age, most of them can be seen spending a whole lot of time on the telephone!
whether a native under the influence of this nakshatra will listen more or speak more, depends upon
the planet posited in this asterism. For example, if saturn is posited in this nakshatra' one will tend
to listen more and may find speaking difficult, while a person who has Mars placed in this nakshatra
canbequiteachatterbox,butmaynotbewel|-versedintheartoflistening.
Philosophical and religious attitudes which rely heavily upon phrases like "word is God "'" and
"In the beginning, there waS the wOrd, from which arOSe everything else "'"' correspondS to this
nakshatra's line of thinking. It is true tlat "om" (or Aun) was the first sound at the beginning of
creation, but it is impoftant to remember that the seed of the universe lay in a silent state before
' t''* '

[page 329]
353
that. The "word" is not "god", but just one of the many expressions of the ultimate causative
principle, commonly known a5 "god".
The downfall of this nakshatra usually lies in excessive generosity which leads to debts and
poverty'. It can also make enemies through bigotry narrow-mindedness or extreme ethical stances.
This nakshatra is not favourable for having and nising children. This seems to hold true in charts
where this asterism falls in the fiflfr house. When Ascendant or Moon is placed in this asterism, or it
is placed in the fifth house, or the fifth lord is placed in this asterism, it usually denotes few chidren
and the native derives litUe happiness from them. On the contrary they are always a source of
anxiety for them.
In the universal scheme of things, Shravana relates to 'apradhrishya shakti'-the power to give
permanent victory' Its symbolism has achievable goals above, and the strength to achieve those
goals below. This imagery is self explanatory. The only thing wofth mentioning is that this strength
is not personal strength, but the collective strength, which comes about due to an alliance with the
higher forces of good, when one is wholeheartedly and unselfishly trying to establish righteousness
over unrighteousness.
Mod.e of functioning :
It is supposed to be a Passive nakshatra. Its passivity relates to the fact that it is receptive and
takes time to listen to others. In fact, much of its organizational skill comes from a passive approach
to things. It tends to let things organize themselves rather than poke its head into the p_rocess too
much.
,.-j'J!
Caste :
Its caste is Mleccha (outcaste). It might surprise some that this amicable and worldly nakshatra
should be regarded as an outcaste. The thing to note here is that this nakshatra was in some way
connected with the lower Capricomian type working class in ancient times. It was related to people

[page 330]
354
whohadtobasica||y|istentoordersandcarrythemout'onthehigher|eve|sthisnakshatrare|ates
to individuals who listen to and follow the inner voice without car-ing much for the social order of
their times, which again puts them in an outcaste category !
Qend.er :
It is a Male nakshatra. This can easily be seen from the fact that its primary ruling deity is
Vishnu,oneofthethreebearersofthemasculineprinciple.Itcarriesasenseofobjectivity,avery
masculine quality. It does have a soft, feminine side to it since Saraswati' one of the three main
feminine archetypes, is also connected with it. saraswati's feminine principle again relates to logic'
reason and learning, but her influence imparts some sensitivity'
tsodyparts d lfwwr (Ayuruefit Canstitution) :
The primary body parts it relates to are the Ears and sex organs' In our view, it can be seen as
the primary indicator of ear and secondary indicator of sex organs' considering its symbol and
imagery its relationship with the ears comes as no surpfise' Besides being the organs of listening'
ears are the balancing organs for the body. This again highlights the balanced nature of this asterism'
Its relationship with the sexual organs is mainly connected to its connection with procreation as a
:means of Preseruation.
shravana is also related to one's gait. capricorn, as we know, is the sign related to gait, but it
is only the shravana part of it which relates to gait. Any affliction to this nakshatra can result in
limping or lameness, especially if the lords of the th, 10b, llb or 12h houses are involved'
It is a primarily "Kapha" (watery) nakshatra due to its strong relationship with the Moon'
Direction :
Its primary di{Si+s-are$rOnO nofthwesL* *"
xr,t-;*.rtti'--

[page 331]
355
eadns (Qnrters) :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 10o 00' - 13o 20' Capricom falls in Aries Navamsa and
is therefore ruled by Mars. Someone born under this pada expresses an underlying Martian quality in
relation to the nakshatra, which is expressed as logic, initiative and a career conscious or ambitious
approach.
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 13o 20' - 16o 40' Capricorn falls in Taurus Navamsa,
ruled by Venus. Therefore the Venusian qualities such as diplomacy, tact and courtesy are dominant
influences in the way this nakshatra expresses itself. This pada corresponds to Pushkara Navamsa
and any planet posited in this pada will give the best results as far as this asterism is concerned. This
pada relates to those involved in organizational aspects of the enteftainment industry especially the
music h.siness....- 1 -. . -,ii
:: The third pada or quarter of this asterism 16" 40' - 20o 00' Capricorn falls in Gemini Navamsa,
ruled by Mercury. This pada brings out the part of Shravana which is flexible, cunning, versed in
speech and conversation and eager to learn. This pada relates to those working in the mass-media
and other communication oriented occupations.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 20o (X)' - 23o 20'Capricorn falls in Cancer Navamsa,
ruled by Moon. This pada brings out the part of Shravana which is receptive, sympathetic and
understanding. It is the most mass-oriented pada of this asterism and thus relates the most to those
holding important publk offices a those io lunar-occupations like hoteliers etc.
:*1 i. -: i:z
;rlr:.
::1:'
lhofusiotu :
Teachers, Preachers and Educators in all fields; Scholars, Students and all those associated
with universities; Linguists, Language Translators and Interpreters; Story Tellers and Narrators;
Comedians; Those involved in the Music Business and Recording Industry (mainly Producers and
Sound technicians); Telephone Operators and all those earning their livelihood by some kind of
ph9ry j9b; Those involved in the preservation of ancient traditions and those pur:Eq classical

[page 332]
356
studies; Those involved in organizational capacities in big and small corporations; Gossip Columnists,
News Broadcasters, Talk Show Hosts and others involved in the radio/television business; Modern
day Counsellors, Psychiatrists, Psychoanalysts and Psychologisb; Radio Operators in different fields
(even those who are involved in catching signals from other civilizaUons in the galary!); Travel
Agents and all those involved in the Transportation and Tourism industry; Those working in the
Hote/Restaurant business; On a higher level Healers and Practitioners of holistic medicine and on a
lower level those involved with allopathy, hospitals and the medical profession in general; Those
connected with Charitable organizations, clubs and societies.
thtu :
Universities; Libraries; Schools; Colleges; Public Auditoriums and other places of public gatherings;
Recording Studios; Hospitals; Telephone Companies; Basically all the places connected to the above
mentioned professions.
9u* ('Essence) an"[ tattwa (E{ement)i
It is a primarily RajasicnaLshafa. This means that it is active on the worldly plane. This activity
can be motivated either by universal interests or purely selfish interests, depending upon the
wolutionary level of the soul in question. This is a good nakshatra for attaining wealth and worldly
accomplishments in general. If a person under a strong influence of this a$erism is poor, one can
infer that this poverty is self inflicted, rather than being fated.
Its element is Air, which again emphasizes the communication aspect of this nakshatra. It
usuaffy relates well to the fire nakshatras like Uttanphalgunietc.
Qana Eype) ,
It is a Godly nakshatra. This is evident since Vishnu, the harbinger of all godly qualities, presides
wer this asteJism. Thb rdates to its genUe, kind, amicablg liberal mirded, prosperous, reasonable

[page 333]
357
and sociable nature. Shravana natives always think twice about doing harm to others and are not
prone to take the lead in any sort of cruelty. .:,
Orfuntation U Disposition :
It is an Upward Looking nakshatra. This relates to its expansive attitude in relation to life in
general. After all, Vishnu took three very expansive steps (refer to the story in the Esoteric Section)
to take away the control of all the three worlds from tuli (the demon king). This expansiveness in
today's world tends to boil down to ambition.
This is a Moveable nakshatra. This is thus a nakshatra which promotes tmvel, mostly in relation
to the career. A lot of natives under ib sffong influence go touring as part of their job which may
involve lecturing and teaching. Natives may enjoy the hotel/tourism side of travelling with this
nakshatra placement.
b,.
Lunar Montfr U Day :
Its energies correspond to the first 9 days of the lunar month of Shrauan. This period usually
corresponds to the month of August in the solar calendar. r:
Shravana is also related to the Trittiya (3'd tithi or day) of the waxing and waning phases of the
Moon's monthly cycle.
Atupicious Actiaitits :
Religious rituals and performances; Beginning new ventures; Entering a new house or buying
property; Medical actions and remedial measures; Taking preventive measures of all kinds; Listening
to advice (listening in general); Social interactions and public involvement; Leaming, study of languages
and classical traditions; Reading and writing; Music, philosophy & meditation; Good for sexual activity;
Making peace; Organizing in general; Making and taking herbs and medicines; Politics; Purchasing

[page 334]
358
new clothes, items and equipment for home or business; Initiations in spiritual learning; Giving and
receiving counselling; Important phone calls; Favourable for travel, especially towards its ruling
directions; Taking a new name; Humanitarian actions in general; Worship of Vishnu or Saraswati.
Unfavourable for aggressive, unceftain or risky activities such as lawsuits, wars etc.; Not good
for creative activities involving manual work; Not good for lending, making promises, oaths etc.; Not
good for putting an erd to things like demolishing old structures; Not gpod for worshipping fierce
deities like Rudr4It is not considered favourable for marriage ceremonies or adopting children.
gtanetary &rhr :
Moon and Satum are the two planets governing this nakshatra. Moon is the nalc$atra's main
planetary ruler and Saturn rules Capricorn, the sign that it falls in. Moon relates to the receptive and
gentle part of Shravana, while Saturn relates to its persevering and organizational aspect.
". Both Moon and Saturn are intimately connected with the masses and mass mentality. This is
where this nakshatra gets its ability to influence mass opinions. This is probably the reason why a lot
of politicians are under a strong influence of this nakshatra. The 10b house, which has a similar
energy to Shravana, bestows position and influence so that one may educate the masses in universal
rnlues and truths. In today's world however, where the majority among the masses are ignorant and
the leaders dumb and selfish, only the negative aspects of this nakshatra come to life. In its higher
aspect, it relates to dissemination of universal truths and knowledge through enterbaining and easy
to understand Vedic epics like the Mahabharab and Ramayana.
t" The lunar energy attains completion in Shravana. In numerology, '2' is considered to be the
Moon's number. Shravana is the 22d asterism and the double'2's' signiff the summation of the lunar
energy. This means that all the best and worst of the lunar qualities are expressed through this
nakshatra. Due to its extreme receptivity, error in judgement is very likely with this nakshatra. Other

[page 335]
359
negative lunar traits like changeability, vacillation, imaginary fears and phobias are also seen in their
extreme expression here. Only in evolved souls do the positive lunar qualities of universal @mpassion,
motherly nufturing and mmplete receptivity to the universal mind are wiuressed.
Moon in Capricorn, Saturn in Cancer or Moon/Saturn together in any sign or house, are the
placements ard combinations which carry an energy similar to that of Shravana.
Moon, Saturn, Mars, Mercury and Venus do well in Shravana. Venus however can make one too
materialistic unless there are other elevaUng factors.
?B
ilowek anl AIpfiabe* :
The first pada or quafter of this asterism 10o 00' - 13o 20' Capricorn, corresponds to ,,Ju" as in
Jupiter or Justin.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 13o 20' - 16o 40' Capricorn, corresponds to "Je,, as
in Jennifer or Jet.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 160 40' - 20o 00' Capricorn, corresponds to "Jo,, as in
Joe.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 20o 00' - 23 20'Capricorn, corresponds to "Gha" as
in Ghana or Ghastly.
In the Sanskit alphabet Shravana corresponds to "Mam", and so its mantra would be "Om
Mam".
SeAtat type ani Compatihility :
Its sexual animal is a Monkey, which indicates more affinity towards aftction and playfulness
than the actual sexual act. Those under the influence of this nakshatra can be exhibitionist in
regards to sexual activities. They are prone to talk more about it rather than actually indulge in it.

[page 336]
360
For sexual & marital compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the table on pages 457
& 458.
f-sourb:
The main puranic story connected with this asterism is as follows:-
"A demon king called Bali had taken over all the three worlds (earth, heaven and the netherworld)
through his might and prowess. The beaten devas(demi gods) appealed to Vishnu for help. Vishnu
assured them that he would restore their heavenly abode to them and rid the universe of the rule of
the demons. He waited until Bali was performing a big Yagya (elaborate religious ceremony). One of
the rules of this Yagya was that Bali could not refuse the demand of any brahmin Keeping this in
mind, Mshnu went to this Yagya in the form of a young brahmin boy. Like all the other brahmins
present there, he was honourably received by Bali and asked what he could do for him. Vishnu in his
hmana form (young Brahmin boy form) asked Bali for land which he could cover within his three
strides. This demand amused Bali as he thought, "Why would this little Brahmin boy want something
as little as three foot strides of land, when he could ask me for millions of other.things?"
Bafi's preceptor, Shukracharya, could see through Vishnu's act and warned Bali not to give into
the innocent looking brahmin boy's request. Bali was a man of his word and told his preceptor that
even though he honoured and respected him, he couldn't go against his vow, and had no option but
to fulfil the brahmin boy's wish. Shukacharya became furious with Bali for not paying heed to his
advice and left the assembly. When Bali was pouring the sacred water from his pot as a ritual
marking for granting the boy's wish, Shukracharya assumed a tiny form and stuck himself in the
pot's spout so that no water could come out of it. Vishnu obviously knew what was going on and so
he took a sharp blade of grass to clear the obstruction. It is said that this blade of grass destroyed
one of Shukracharya's eyes, and this is the reason why he is always poftrayed as having one eye
ever since.

[page 337]
361
With the obstacle removed and the ritual over, it was time for the brahmin boy to take his three
strides worth of land. Suddenly the boy's size started increasing until it got so big that no one could
see his head anymore. In one stride he took both the netherworld and the earth, and in the second
stride he took heaven. Then Vishnu turned around to Bali and said, "Now where do I put my third
foot?" Bali knowing that he had no other place to give, offered his own head for him to put his third
stride. Vishnu smiled and put his foot on Bali's head.
'.?
Bafi was immediately transpofted into the lowest among the foufteen lokas. Yishnu had now
restored the earth to humans and the heavens to the gods. He was however very pleased with Bali's
magnanimity and devoUon to universal laws. He conferred on him the status as the doorkeeper of
the'outer most universal sheath'. He also promised to help him out whenever he was in need. At a
later point in time, Vishnu actually took the job of a doorkeeper in Bali's palace at his behest | "
If one just contemplates on this story it reveals everything about the nature, functioning and
quality of Shravana. Vishnu taking the form of an innocent brahmin boy relates to the amiable,
innocent front projected by this nakshatra. This nakshatra is clever in achieving its goals in much the
same way as Vishnu was about achieving his. This nakshatra keeps to its word the same way Bali
kept his word.
One interesting thing which comes out of this story is that Venus doesn't like to be placed in this
asterism, seeing how this incident was detrimental to Shukracharya, who is intimately connected
with the planet Shukra (Venus). This might seem odd as Capricorn is a friendly sign to Venus. In our
view Venus does better in other parts of Capricorn in comparison with the $glggg pe$..+.
This story also brings out the highest expression of this nakshatra, which is upholding the
universal law at all costs. Since'2f is seen as the number of perfection, the number'22'is regarded
as'0'or a new beginning by ancient mystery schools. Even in the Tarot declg the 22d elrd does not
exist. Instead there is a '0'card known as 'The fuo|". "The Fool" is a character, who is ready to jump
into any unknown or foreign situation without any concern for the past, future or ib consequences.
If this character is receiving its impulses from the universal mind, then all the actions undertaken are

[page 338]
362
fruitful and necessary. On the other hand, if this character is guided by the e99 gr other false
external influences, the outcome is disaster. This character is what Shravana is all about.
Qotra (Cetestiat Lircage) :
This nakshatra is related to the Sage Vashishta, one of the seven celestial sages looking after
the affairs of our galaxy. The name of this sage translates into "possessor of wealth", so the prosperity
aspect of this nakshatra is reinforced from this angle as well.
Xentedia[ :
For those suffering from bad effects resulting from afflictions to this nakshatra, the best remedial
measure is worship of Vishnu, the preserver and maintainer of all creation. This worship can be done
through use of mantra and meditation on any or all of Vishnu3 incarnations and aspects.
Repetition of the root mantra of this nakshatra - "Om Mam" 108 times when Moon transits this
nakhatra and in its corresponding lunar month, is sure to reduce suffering and bring enlightenment
into a person's life.
Persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this nakshatra can also increase its good
effects through the above mentioned ways. It is helpful for them to wear colours like white and light
blue. They should use its directions, lunar month and the days when Moon transits Shravana to take
all impoftant actions.
E4amp{z:
Muhammd A/, the famous boxer, has his Moon in Shravana. He was famous for using words to
destabilize his opponents, whilst always maintaining his own balance. In his chart, Moon, as his
ascendant lord, is placed in the seventh house, house of opponents.

[page 339]
Misce[laneous :
According to Varahamihira, Moon in Shravana makes a person "learned, rich, famous and
prosperous; and gives the native a liberal minded spouse". In our example case, all these results fit
in pefectly. Muhammed Ali did in fact get liberal-minded spouses, who rebelled against his own
narrowminded social, religious and political semlbiliUes.

[page 340]
zt phanishta z1"zot (aVdcom - 6"+o'Aquarius

[page 341]
i*/-
*t...rP a
t?f
sr:;
e${i!
r-r*.i,
23.
Dfrm.isfi.to
(23020' Capricorn - 6040' Aquarius)
In tfu Sky t *e
; Dhanishf4 the zenith of maftian energy, is represented in the celestial firmament by four stars
in the constellation known as Delphini(the Dolphin). These four stars are arranged in a rhombus
shape, which the ancients saw as signiffing a drum. In modern astronomy these stars are known as
Alpha-Delphini, Beta-Delphini, Delta-Delphini& Gamma-Delphini. This asterism can be seen lying in
the dark empty space above the constellations of Capricorn and Aquarius. Beta Delphini, having a
visual magnitude of only 3.63, is the brightest among these stars, making Dhanishta less bright in
comparision to other asterisms" However it can be easily spotted as there are no bright constellations
in ib vicinity.
,);
9{atne
7'' "Dhanishta" translates into - "the wealthiest" or "the most beneficient". The reader can already
understand the basic energy of this asterism through this simple meaning. Its alternative name is
'Shravishtau, a sanskritterm, which translates into "the most heard of" or "the mostfamous". This
again is a self-explanatory meaning, which directly hints at the extremely lucky quality of this asterism.
The name Shravishta implies that Dhanistrta forms a pair with the previous nakshatra Shrauarp.

[page 342]
368
Symhot :
All scholars agree on the fact that a musical drum is the main symbol of this nakshatra. However
there is a difference of opinion in regards to the type of musical drum. Some equate the drum with
a bbr, some with a tabla, some with a mridanga, but in our view the drum is actually a damaru.
Damaru is Shiva's favourite drum.
The drum (damaru) conveys two main attributes - music and hollowness. Hollowness here
relates to receptivity to outer influences. In its highest expression this receptivity allows one to be an
instrument of the universal mind without letting the ego interfere with the process. Since this nakshatra
follows Shravana, it relates to the process where what we have listened to is synthesized. This gives
this nakshatra the ability to actually accomplish things like playing music etc. In its lowest expression,
this nakshatra is susceptible to receiving lower level influences, and thus its outer works are not as
elevating as they are in its highest expression. A drum as we know is a rhythmical instrument, which
can be associated with time, and time is the rhythm of the universe. This is why this nakshatra is said
to have immaculate timing.
Ib altemative symbol is a flute, which again emphasizes the fact that music is produced through
hollowness, in much the same way as celestial music is created through the hollowness of universal
space.
Deity :
Dhanishta is presided over by a group of eight gods called t'e Vasus. "Vasu" translates into
"superb", "excellent or "wealthy". Their names are:-
Apa, whichtranslates into'water'. He is a male deity usually related to Apah,the water goddess
of Puruashadha.
Dhruva, which translates into 'the fixed', and is related to the pole star at any
€.
ume. 2
.- .u'.. .!' r'
gNen point in

[page 343]
369
- t z'1.
(A'o*"" '1 t \
Dhara, which translates into 'a bearer' or 'a stream of water'. This deity is akin to 'the man
pouring water from a pot' - the symbol of Aquarius.
Anih, which translates into 'wind'. This deity is the same as Vayu, the wind god who is the ruler
O -^-of Swati. Vlr^t*('U' \_/
' Soma, whiqh translates into 'the Moon'. He is the same as the Moon deity associated with
Mrigashin.
Anala, which translates into 'fire'. This deity is another manifestauon of Agni, the fire god who
/rules Krittika. (a1". 5)
Pratyusha,*rj,.n u.nr,utes into'dawn'. He is the male counterpart of lJsha,the solar goddess
who rides in front of the Sun. This might be the deity which made limi Hendrk, a musician with
prominent Dhanishta influence, come up with the phrase "first rays of the new rising sun".
Pnb!9s1, which translates into'lightl This is another solar deity related to the morning time.
i'! ''t' ' ]-'. '
As we can see, all these eight deities carry within them the energies of different nakshatras.
This makes Dhanishta a soft of compendium of the energies of earlier nakshatras i.e. specifically
Ashwini, Krittika, Mrigashira, Swati and Purvashadha. These eight Vasus are supposed to be wealthy
and skilled at music. This conveys this nakshatra's mastery over the material plane and relates it
with the rhythmical, musical functionings of the universal mind. This is probably the reason why a lot
of scholars associated the signs of astrology with this asterism, which in a way is understanding the
rhythm of the universe.
Shiva isthe ultimate presiding deity of this asterism. This can be easily understood from the
hct that part of this asterism lies in Aquarius, a sign completely under the influence of Shiva.
Ancient puranic scriptures are full of stories of Shiva's immense musical ability. Shiva, even while
wreaking havoc and destruction, does so in a graceful and rhythmical dance form known as tandaua,
exempf ified by his famous nataral? posture. In fact, two of the main Indian classical dance systems
directly originate from Shiva.

[page 344]
370
In a way, this nakshatra can be seen as a bridge between Vishnub and Shiva's energy. It can
thus be related to the half-Vishnu, half-Shiva form which can still be found in some temples in India.
Vishnu relates to its mastery of the material world, whib Shiva relates to its musical and bohemian
aspect.
'1" -
Afuture U functbnlnq :
Much of the nature of this nakshatra can be derived from the nature and qualities of the eight
gods presiding over it.
From Apah, it derives its musical ability, confidence, invincibility and a warrior-like disposition,
which in its negative aspect can manifest as vanity and obstinacy. This can sometimes lead this
nakshatra to'beat its own drum'.
From Druva, it derives the fixed part of its nature, which relates to its reliability, perseverance
and good organizational ability. In a negative aspect it manifests as stubbornness. Dhanishta natives
do not like to be told what to do !
From Dhara, it derives its wisdom, charitable nature and conversational ability. In its negative
aspect it makes one a chatterbox, or having a tendency to disperse their energies in unconstrucijve,
unwholesome ways.
From Anila, this nakshatra derives its business acumen, resourcefulness and motivation to
accomplish things. In its negative aspect this can make one self seeking or generally worried about
their prospecLs
From Anala, it derives its energy, mental acumen and discrimination. In its negative aspect it
can make this nakshatra bad tempered and consequently capable of hurting others.
From Pratyusha, it derives its radiance, happiness, joy and hopefulness. Nature expresses
unbounded joyfulness through sunrise, which this nakshatra usually tries to accomplish through
music and dancing.

[page 345]
371
From Prabhasa, it derives its lightheartedness, purity, good nature and wholesome aspirations.
From Soma, it derives its gentleness and sensitivity, which some times can manifest as fickleness,
deceptiveness or extreme indulgence.
The reader can easily infer from the above that Dhanishta is all about living a good life. The
reader can also infer how it is not easy to put the Dhanishta personality in a box. It has many diverse
aspects to its nature, making it one of the most expressive among the nakshatras. It has an ability
to adapt itself to any situation in which it finds itself.
Those born with Dhanishta rising on the Ascendant usually carry a rich, liberal, radiant expression
on their faces. They exude confidence and nobility. They have a peculiarly captivating smile, which
conveys a feeling of deep satisfaction at some inner level. In some cases they can have roving eyes.
Being good conversationalists, Dhanishta natives can always put the other person at ease very
quickly. This will hold more true of those natives who are born under the Aquarius part of this
nakhatra. The Gpricorn paft has a more worldly orientation and thus lacks in the more refined,
divine aspects
All those who have Dhanishta happening in their chart, one way or the other, have a good
sense of rhythm and enjoy music and dance. It is very easy for them to excel in these fields if they
work at it. Dhanishta natives tend to be good at sports because rhythm and timing are the key to
almost all sports' This holds especially true for track and field athletics, ball games and gymnastics.
Natives are especially good at sports like gymnastics, where grace is a prerequisite.
This is a social nakshatra, which likes to be part of groups. It is not a loner and likes to mingle
with people' Since it is naturally ambitious and is always conscious of its'dharma,, it very rarely
shows escapist tendencies. It would rather confront things, which can make it appear argumentative
at times.
When Moon occupies this asterism, the person concerned often goes for mates or partners who
are very different in personality and outlook to them. This obviously leads to a lot of cbnflict in these

[page 346]
372
issues. This can be seen to be most true when Moon occupies the Capricorn part of this asterism. A
lot of scholars are unanimous regarding the peculiar property of this asterism in promoting marital
discord. Since this asterism carries so many good qualities, such a thing does not make sense
straight away, In our view the martian aspect of this asterism is responsible for this problem'
Mars is regarded as the most unfavourable ptanet ior marital harmony. Once again the Capricorn
paft of this asterism has more problems in this regard as compared to the Aquarius part. This is
simply because Aquarius has a more accommodating nature as compared to Capricorn, These marital.
difficulties are usually enhanced when either Mars, Saturn, Rahu or Ketu are placed in this nakshatra,
especially the Capricorn part. If this placement has some connection with the seventh house, it
might be impossible for such a person to have a smooth married life. In our experience, most C-ancer
Ascendants, whose Ascendant falls within 16" 40' - 30o 00', have difficulty in married life or sometimes
don,t marry at all. This is because Dhanishta falls on the seventh house cusp' Those under the
strong negative influence of the C-apricorn part of Dhanishta often end up hating the opposite sex.
Rama, one of Vishnu's avatars, who is regarded as the epitome of good conduct and
righteousness, faced numerous problems in his married life. In his chart, Mars is placed in the
Capricorn part of Dhanishta in the seventh house. He had to fight a big war to rescue his kidnapped
wife Sita, and even after things returned to normal, he had to abandon her on some very flimsy
ground. The readers can refer to the ancient Vedic epic of "Ramayana" for the whole story.
Dhanishta always has the ability to tune into some source. The most impoftant aspect of this is
the source it tunes itself into, In the present day world where media acts as the primary influence for
the masses, and provides them with ever declining and degenerating standards of culture, music,
dance, fine arts etc. , most Dhanishta kinds find themselves tuning into these unwholesome influences.
This is the reason why the higher expressions of this nakshatra, which come about by direct tuning
in with the universal mind, are a rarity nowadays'
In the universal scheme of things, Dhanishta relates to " khyapayitri shakti" - the power to give
fame and abundance. Its symbolism has birth above and prosperity below' This symbolism and
imagery re-emphasizes the beneficial and po$tjve aspect of this nakshatra. Dhanishta can be seen

[page 347]
373
as the zenith of woddly achievements, a characteristic often attached with the sign Capricorn. It
goes without saying that only when these worldly achievements are in tune with universal requirements
do they have any lasting meaning.
Modc d funrtioning :
In keeping with its basic nature and disposition, ancient Vedic seers saw this as an active
asterism. Even infants born under a strong influence of this nakshatra are more active than other
infants. They start to respond to music from a much earlier age than others. This is a nakshatra
meant for getting out in the world and doing things.
Caste :
It belongs to the Farmer caste. It is puzzling for everyone to understand why such a wealthy
and well endowed asterism should be assigned to the working caste. This relates to the fact that this
nakshatra falls in Saturn's sign, a planet which was seen as belonging to theiworking class. Dhanishta
is involved in all farmer like, creative activities, which deal with actual production of goods etc.
Qendtr :
It is a Female nakshatra. This is odd considering the fact that all its presiding deities are male.
This is because this nakshatra relates more to the energies of its deities, rather than the adual
deities themselves. These energies are their 'shaktis' and are always feminine. It is a feminine force
which presides over all creative arts like music and dancing. It is no wonder then, that all male
dancers of the classical forms are quite feminine in their appearance and disposition !

[page 348]
374
Ro[yparts d l{urwr (Ayurue[ic Constitution) :
The bodyparts it relates to the most are the back and the anus. The spinal cord as we know is
directfy related to the planet Saturn and the sign C.apricorn. The kundalini energy rises from the area
around the anus and travels upwards through the back to the top chakra on the head. This is the
only way for human beings to tune into the universal mind. As discussed earlier, this nakshatra
requires one to do that in order to express its qualities.
It is a primarily "pitta" (fiery) nakshatra due to its strong relation with Mars.
Direction :
It is related to east, south east, south, west and southwest.
eadas (Qnrters) :
The first pada or quafter of this asterism 23o 20' - 26" 40' Capricorn, falls in Leo Navamsa and
is ruled by Sun. This portion relates to the ambitious part of this asterism. It combines the energies
of Sun, Mars and Saturn and directs one towards woddly accomplishments. Since Sun as we know is
not a favourable planet for marriage, this pada is not good for marital harmony. It can also be too
aggressive. This pada assures easy success in one's undeftakings, and often brings the native under
its influence into some kind of limelight.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 26" 40' - 30" 00' Capricorn, falls in Virgo Navamsa
ruled by Mercury. It relates to the skilful and communicative paft of this nakshatra. This is a highly
adaptable pada which often gives a lot of success in one's chosen pursuits, however once again
Mercury's mutability is not good for marital harmony. The rulership of Mercury gives this pada good
mind-hand coordination, which promotes musical and athletic skill.
The tiird pada or quafter of this asterism 0o 00' - 3" 20' Aquarius, falls in Libra Navamsa ruled
by Venus. This relates to the amicable, optimistic, happy, social, musical, group orientated and

[page 349]
375
wealthy aspect of Dhanishta. Since Venus is the natural significator of harmony, this pada promotes
marital harmony. This is the pada which carries the most refined and subde attributes of this naktratra.
It relates to those involved in music, fine arts, divination and astrology.
The fourth pada or quader of this asterism 30 20' - 60 40' Aquarius, falls in Scorpio Navamsa
ruled by Mars. This pada has excessive maftian energy and relates to the rhythmical aspect of this
asterism. It is helpful in creative arts requiring a lot of energy like drumming etc. This pada is
sympathetic to the underdog, however this pada is not good for marital harmony due to its excessive
aggressiveness. This pada has a warrior's attitude and gives sporting prowess and athletic ability.
{Profusiotu :
Musicians, Dancers and Peformers; All those involved in the Management side of the
entertainment industry; Drummers and those involved in the rhythm sections of bands and orchestras;
Geative Artists of all types; Those involved in military bands and other types of marching bands;
Gemstones and Precious Metal Dealers; Athletes and other Sports Persons; Group Coordinators in all
fields; Those in the Real Estate Business; Landscape Artists; Those who deal in Financial Transactions;
Scientists and Physicists; Computer Professions; Warriors and Mititary people; Poets, Songwriters
and Reciters of rhythmical incantations; Makers of musical instruments; Vocalisb with more emphasis
on delivery than melody; Astrologers and Divinators; Psychic Channellers & Mediums; On a higher
level those involved in Holistic Healing through Kundalini Yoga; On a lower level Surgeons and
Medical Practitioners; Professions involving high tech devices and electronic equipment; professions
requiring versatility and multiple task ability; Managers in general. The immense versatility of this
nakshatra allows it to be involved in all types of professions, especially those involving large monies.
tPfaces :
All places related to music and other creative arts ranging from Schools to Studios to Dance
Halls etc; Meditation Rooms; Mapagerial Offices; Real Estate Agencies; Gardens; Science Labs;

[page 350]
376
Factories with high tech equipment or producing high tech equipment; Amusement Centres and
Sports Stadiums; All places related to sports; Financial centres and institutions like Banks etc. ;
Safes where wealth and valuables are stored.
guoa ('Essence) and'Tattwa (Efzment) :
It is supposed to be a Tamasicnalshatra. This is clear from the fact that two inherently tamasic
planets, Mars and Saturn, govern this nakshatra. This however does not mean that this nakshatra is
averse to activity. It just means that this nakshatra is more geared towards dissolution, than creation
or maintenance.
It belongs to the Ether element. The ether element can mingle and cooperate with all the
elements. This is what gives this nakshatra its all encompassing quality, just as space and ether
pervade everything. This nakshatra likes to keep its horizons as wide as possible.
Qana EWd t
It is considered a Demonic nakshatra. Once again, this can be attributed to its close relationship
to the two natural malefics, Mars and Saturn. It carries an energy which always tries to bring about
change in the present. Most godly nakshatras are related to maintaining the status quo, so in the
present times however, this seemingly negative quality of this asterism is definitely positive from a
universal point d view !
Orienntiott & DisPositi-on :
It is an Upward Looking nakshatra in keeping with ib natural expansive nature. This is a nakshatra
signiffing increase and expansion.
It is a Moveable or ephlmeral nakshatra. This means that it relates to travelling and change in
all its forms. This is probably the reason why some rholars say that this nakshatra does well in

[page 351]
377
foreign countries. A person with a strong influence of this nakshatra is likely to travel a lot and attain
success in a foreign land.
Lunar Montft & Dau :
It relates to the middle portion (the middle 9 days) of the lunar month of Shravana. This period
usually corresponds to the month of August in the solar calendar.
Dhanishta is also related tothe Ashtami(8th tithior day) of the waxing and waning phases of
the Moon's monthly cycle.
Auspi"cious Attiaitits :
Religious rituals and peformances; Creative activities in general, especially musical and dancing;
Group activities of all kinds; Mega celebratory events involving huge crowds like concefts, opening
ceremonies etc.; All activities involving pomp and splendour; Purchasing moveable and immoveable
property; Travelling - good for both short trips and long journeys; All activities requiring aggression
and a pro-active attitude; Lending money and all kinds of financial transactions; Meditation and
Yoga; Gardening; Buying new clothes, gemstones, jewellery etc.; Favourable for treating diseases
and commencing educational ventures; Career activities involving fame and recognition; Learning
how to use high tech equipment and weapons.
Inauspirious Actioities :
Unfavourable for sexual activity or marriage; Activities of a fixed or restrictive character like
giving up old habits etc; Not a good time to form new partnerships; Homely activities like cleaning
etc; Dealings with people requiring tact, cleverness and gentleness.
"ll r:.. ; :a

[page 352]
378
etrnretary fu.fer :
The main planetary influences affecting this nakshatra are Mars, Saturn, Rahu and Uranus,
Mars being its primary ruler. It represents the pinnacle of Martian enercy. Consequently bravery is a
quality strongly associated with this nakshatra. This is the reason why it connects with warriors,
weapons and military personnel. Courage is a prerequisite for a lot of sports as well such as adventure
spofts or mountain climbing, and so this nakshatra finds its expression through people involved in
such activities.
Saturn's rulership relates to the persevering nature and organizational ability of this nakshatra.
It usualry sets itself longterm goals, which it likes to fulfil at any cost. Discipline, as we know, is a key
to excelling in any of the creative afts as well'
Dhanishta is the nakshatra which finally accomplishes the difficult task of harmonizing the
divergent energies of Mars and Saturn. The maftian energy is at its absolute refinement here and
this is why Dhanishta is the pinnacle of Martian energy. It has the wisdom to use energy (Mars)
constructively over time (Saturn), a quality whlch brings about all its other good qualities and ib
ability to gain wealth. We can see how keeping rhythm while playing drums is a very similar activity'
Dhanishta understands the rhythm of life, and its capacity to stick to the rhythm/tune makes it reap
all the best the universe has to offer.
Its relationship with Rahu and Uranus connects it with the mass media, and this is the reason
why a lot of top people in the entertainment industry have a strong Dhanishta influence in their
chaft. It likes to make people wealthy and respected in their chosen fields, and in the present day
and age Rahu and Uranus are keys to astounding success in any field'
' In general astrological terms, Mars in Capricom, Mars in Aquarius, Rahu-Mars conjunction and
Mars-Saturn conjunction in nakshatras like Rohini, fvlrigashira, Purnavasu, Pushya, Chitra, Anuradha
or Uttarabhadrapada carry an energy similar to that of Dhanishtha. Rahu-Mars-Saturn conjunction
completely caries the energy of this nakshatra.

[page 353]
379
Moon, Mars, Saturn, Mercury Venus and Rahu usually do well in Dhanishta. Moon and Mars do
better in the Capricorn paft while Mercury Venus and Rahu fare better in the Aquarius paft. Saturnb
positioning in this nak$ratra will make success slow to come and may totally deny marital pleasures.
'I/outefs an{ Alpfiabe* :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 23o 20' -26" 40'C-apricorn, corresponds to ,,Ga" as in
Galileo.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 260 40' - 30o O0' Capricorn, corresponds to "Gi" as
in Gibson or G. I. Joe.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 0o 00' - 30 20' Aquarius, corresponds to "Gu" as in
Guitar and Gustav.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 3" 20' - 6o 40' Aquarius, corresponds to "Ge,' as in
George or Gertha.
In the Sanskrit alphabet Dhanishta corresponds to "Yam" and "Ram", consequently its mantras
are "Om Yam" and "Om Ram",
Seryat'Type anf Compatifiility :
Its sexual animal is a Lion. As we will discover later in the Esoteric Section, this nakshatra has
a strong connection with the lion, which goes far beyond its sexual preferences. On a sexual plane
this type does not relate well with other nakhatras, except the lion/tiger nakshatras - Dhanishta,
Chitra, Vishakha and Puruabhadrapada. In keeping with its animal, it is not very enthusiastic about
sexual activity even though it might have multiple partners. ;.
For sexual & marital compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the tables on page 457
& 458.

[page 354]
380 Chapter 23: Dhanishta
Boterb :
The stars of this nakshatra lie very close to the constellation of Andromda, where a lot of godly
and asuric (demonic) forces are said to reside. However the eight Vasus, which preside over the
stars of the constellation of Delphinus, are all godly in nature. Delphinus is associated with Dolphins,
the most intelligent and benevolent among all the sea creatures. This nakshatra shares a lot of its
traits with dolphins. Even dolphins are known for their permanent mysterious smile!
This constellation soft of lies on the borderline between Shiva's and Vishnu'sterritory' From an
astrological point of view, it connects the signs of Capricorn and Aquarius' Capricorn or the 10s
house as we know relates to karma, while Aquarius or the llb house corresponds to the fruits of
karrlla. This nakshatra thus relates to the fulfilment of one's goals, desires and ambitions as a result
of good karma from previous birttrs. It is the balancing point between the forces of maintenance and
deStrUCtiOn. ,..,.:;!,; ,;..4 t,*;..:,
This is the 23'd nakshatra and'23'is a number associated in numerology with the phrase, "the
royal star of the lion". This obviously alludes to the star Rqulus, which forms the core of the
nakshatra uMaghau,In the zodiacal belt, "Magha" lies directly opposite the Aquarius part of this
nakshatra. Thus these two nakshatras can be seen as paftners. Magha, as we know, is the nakshatra
related to royal honours and exalted status. Dhanishta, especially its latter half, also carries within
itself these qualities. One can see that the lion is an animal strongly associated with both of these
nakshatras. .23'is regarded in numerology as a very fortunate number signifying completion. Both
these nakshatras carry the completion aspect of this number, which makes them become the best in
their chosen fields, due to repeated past life efforts or having more paramatmamsha (the part
belonging to the eternal absolute one).
Qotra (Cetzstut Lineage) i -;.. :.i
This nakshatra is related to the Sage Angiras,one of the seven celestial sages looking after the
affairs of our galaxy. The name of this sage translates into "the fiery one", which is in keeping with
the martian aspect of this asterism'

[page 355]
The 27 Celestial Poftals
fumediat :
For those suffering from bad effects resulting from afflictions to this nakshatra, the best remedial
measure is worship of the lion-riding Goddess Durga, or Hari-Hara, a deity with a half-Vishnu, half-
Shiva form. Alternatively one can worship the eight Vasus. The practice of RalT-yoga, which involves
the raising of the kundalinithrough the seven sacred centres, is one of the best ways to utilise this
nakshatra's potential.
Repetition of the root mantras of this nakshatra - "Om Yam" and "Om Ram" 108 times when
Moon transits this nakshatra and its corresponding lunar month, is sure to reduce suffering and
bring enlightenment into a person's life.
Persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this nakshatra can also increase the
good effects through the above mentioned ways. It is helpful for.them to wear colours like red, blue
and gold. They should use its directions, lunar month and the days when Moon transits Dhanishta to
underbake all important actions.
Eryrmp{z :
The Life of Bheeshma, one of the major characters in the Vedic epic, "Mahabharata 'i exemplifies
the functionings of Dhanishta. He took and observed the vow of lifelong celibacy and was
unconquerable in battle; was generous even to his competitors and showed immaculate courage till
his dying breath.
Marilyn Montoe, the famous model and actress, has her Moon in Dhanishta in the P house.
The 7h house relates to one's public image and relationship with the masses. She definitely utilised
all of Dhanishta's charm to become a mass sex symbol. Her famous smile and heavy alluring eyelids
characterise the peculiar, self assured and captivating facial expression of this nakshatra. However
Dhanishta spoilt her marital life. She had two unsuccessful marriages and a host of unsatisfying
affairs.
381

[page 356]
382
Misce[laruous :
According to Varahamihira, Moon in Dhanishta makes a person "liberal, brave, rich and adept at
music and other fine alts". Those who know about Marifn Monroe can see that her life fits in
perfectly with the above description. She was more intelligent and learned than her public image
portrayed and was said to have liberal views. She even married people who were at the top of their
respective fields. Her Moon is in the first pada of this nakshatra in Capricorn,which as we menUorred
earlier, can make one a star but,does not promote marital harmony.
***

[page 357]
F€fgg{
,.iit':
#r.'
z+. $hatabhisha 6'+0' Aqu"rius - zoooo' Aqrarius

[page 358]
24.
Sfrotabf,isnn
(6040' Aquarius - 20000' Aquarius)
In tfrc Sky t
Shatabhisha, the apex of Rahu's functioning, is represented in the celestial firmament by a faint
group of stars in the heaft of the constellation of Aquarius. The ancients designated a hundred
among these faint group of stars as belonging to this asterism. The brightest among this group with
a visuaf magnitude of only 3.85, is a star known in modern astronomy as Gamma-Aquarii (Sadachbia).
Despite its faintness, the general location of this asterism can be gauged by its neighbouring bright
star, Alpha-Aquarii (Sadalnelik). Sadachbia lies slightly above on the left hand side of this bright star.
A{ame :
"Shatabhisha" (also spelt as 'Shatabhishak'2 translates simply into - "the hundred physicians,',
"the hundred medicines", or "possessing a hundred healers". Though this bizarre name conveys a
part of this asterism's functioning, it doesn't completely convey its vast connotations. Its alternative
name is "Shatataraka" which translates into "possessing a hundred stars". This is in obvious reference
to the fact that the vedic seers saw this asterism as a collection of a hundred stars, with each one of
the stars representing one physician/medicine.

[page 359]
386
Sym6o[ :
Its main symbol is an'empty circle'. This circle can be seen either as a round magical charm or
as a representation of the infinite void of creation. A circle can represent many things - the circle of
life; the circle of the zodiac; the circle of creation, maintenance and dissolution'
The importance of the circle can be seen from the following words spoken by Black Elk, an
Oglata Srbuxholy man - 'You have noticed that everything an Indian (native American indian) does
is in a circle, and that is because the power of the world always works in circles, and everything tries
to be round ... the sky is round, and I've heard that earth is round like a ball, and so are all the stars'
The wind, in its greatest power whorls. Birds make their nest in circles, tor theirs is the same religion
as ours ... even the seasons form a great circle in their changing, and always come back again to
where they were. The lift of a man is a circh fuorn childhood to childhood, and so it is in everything
where power moves."
Besides these universal ideas, the circle also suggests an idea of containment or circulation.
There is an idea of protection and hiding related to this asterisin. The circle can act as a boundary
and protect one from the dangers outside its circumference. A circle can conceal and hide things just
like an opaque jar hides the liquid inside. This nakshatra is thus related with secrets and the ability
to conceal secrets.
A circle also carries the idea of identity through segregation. A shoreline separates the ocean
from land and thus allows for its identity. This asterism thus relates to all enclosed water bodies like
lakes and oceans. It however does not represent rivers, as rivers are not enclosed on all sides. In the
same way the idea of containment can be seen in our own beings, as the physical body houses and
offers protection to the soul or astral body.
This asterism has a lot to do with the idea of protection, which can operate on many levels of
existence. The part in the Vedic epic, the Ramayana, where Lakhmana drew a line around the hut
for Sibb *fety and asked Sita not to cross it, is a wonderful example of the magical containment
and protection connotation of this asterism.

[page 360]
387
Deity :
Even though this nakshatra is related to a hundred physicians through its name, its main deity
is Varuna, the lord of the oceans. In essence, Varuna can be seen as the representative deity of the
water element in nature. This fact automatically relates this nakshatra with all kinds of liquids in the
physical as well as astral realm. Varuna can be equated with the planet Neptune, as it is seen in
modern astrology. Varuna like Neptune is the lord of the cosmic and terrestrial waters.
In this nakshatra's image, Varuna can be seen holding a pot. This pot contains gma - the
preferred drink of the gods. This drink is the heavenly ambrosia, which suggests the idea of
rejuvenation and intoxication. We can easily see that the liquids we consume in our day to day life
produce the same two effects. In the other hand Varuna is seen holding some medicinal herbs. This
is where the hundred physicians come into the picture. This asterism has a lot to do with healing on
all levels of existence, whereas the herbs only signify healing on a physical level,
The idea of magical cures through divine waters is common to all cultures. Our everyday glass
of water is a vital rejuvenator in the sense that it keeps us alive. "Blue are the life giving waters taken
for granted, they quietly understand ..." as Jimi Hendrix, a contemporary musical genius put it.
Oceans have always been seen in the Vedic texb as a repositor of herbs which can cure every
possible disease' Some of these herbs came out during the ctruming of the ocean undertaken by the
gods and demons collectively (Please refer to the author's previous work 'The Rahu-Ketu Experience"
ftgar PubliationSlndia; 'The Key of Life' Lotus PressllJSA ). Even Amrita, the elixir of eternal life,
came out of the ocean during this churning. 1 ,: :.
On the highest level, this asterism falls under the jurisdiction of Shiua, the lord of the ascetics.
Shiva, as we know, presides over the sign Aquarius, and since this asterism falls in the heaft of the
sign Aquarius, it automatically falls under Shiva's donrain. Consequently it canies within itself Shiva,s
mystical, contemplative, ascetic and dissoluting nature.

[page 361]
388
fr{gture (t functioning :
Secrecy is the one quality which immediately separates Shatabishak from other nakshatras'
even though a fot of other nakshatras like Anuradha, Jyestha and Puruashadha can be secretive'
Shatabhishak, however, is in a league of its own when it comes to hiding thoughts, motives, self or
anything else. In fact, Shatabishak derives almost all of its power from what is hidden' Whether it be
the herbs in the ocean or secret formulaes of nature's functionings, Shatabishak always tries to gain
access to whatever is hidden and in doing so attains its power. shatabhishak is not always very ready
to share the hidden secrets it has discover":,*110 git"t"r#*" them just 
"*:*t8 
ocean covers up
many a treasure.
As we shall discover, Shatabhishak is one of the main nakshatras presiding over media in all its
forms, especially electronic media. In today's world, media as we know, functions on the twin principles
of secrecy and deception. The people "running the show" obviously know about ule truth regarding
the actual seat of power, whilst all that the masses get is a smokescreen. Shatabishak is the ultimate
con artist. . j., .:,
Shatabishak's essential nature is to view everything with suspicion' Natives under the influence
of its energy usually take their time to get accustomed to new things, thoughts, places and people'
Their suspicious nature ofun makes them be on guard, thus making them capable of shielding
themselves from harm. once again, the circle symbolism comes into play. shatabishak natives usually
draw a hard to penetrate boundary around themselves which makes it difficult for others to approach
them. The reclusive aspect of Shatabishak arises directly from its inclination to create these walls
and boundaries.
NaUves are generally solitary eccentric, reclusive, and introvefted. The plus side to this aspect
is that'rts reclusivity gives it the capacity to be alone. Being alone gives rise to contemplation, which
in turn produces wisdom and enlightenment. In negative cases, this seclusion can only translate into
pessimism and self pity. Shatabishak is as keen on unravelling secrets as it is on keeping secrets'
This is why most Shatabishak natives enjoy activiUes like solving puzzles or those which involve the
pursuit of something hidden'

[page 362]
389
Shatabishak loves to get to the truth of anything in much the same way as Mutalovesto get to
the root of everything. Even though Shatabishak natives are usually quiet and undemonstrative,
(which one should expect them to be since they are supposed to be the masters of serecy); they
often blurt out harsh trutrs at the most inoppoftune moments. This is in fact one of the major
problems Shatabishak natives face in climbing the ladder of success, especially material success.
Refinement and.sensitivity is not their fofte.
' It is noticed that most natives under the strong influence of Shatabishak lack proper grooming
and education in their formative years. They often have to make their own rules for dealing with
today's rough world, which adds to their innate roughness. They have extremely cold, calculating
heads and there is a marked tendency to completely suppress the emotional nature.
Shatabishak in i way represents the culmination of the air dement. It is thus the master of the
mental, analytical and logical. In its higher mode, Shatabishak can be all pervasive, just like the air.
This ability to relate to everyone without preconceptions, judgements and prejudice is what makes
a philosopher out of Shatabishak. Their philosophy is usually heavy on intellectualism, butthe evolved
souls understand that emotional and mental bodies need to be integrated in order for any true
understanding to occur.
Those with Shatabishak rising have their own pafticular brand of magnetism, even though they
lack conventional charm and beauty. They are often unkempt in relation to their appearance and
clothing. Their countenance is usually calm, quiet, shy and reserued but they however have a tendency
to explode every now and then. Absentmindedness is one of their marked features. They usually
convey a sense of aloofness even if they are genuinely attentive from the inside. Their negative
traits include laziness, addictions, perversions and vulnerability to all types of mental/emotional/
psychological disorders. Their positive qualities include enterprise, moderation, discriminaton,
philosonhical attitude, truth -seeking and unbounded vision.
On a material plane, Shatabhisha has a tendency to make a "zero" out of the things it affects in
a nativity. For example if someone has their second lord placed in Shatabhisha they might experience
a pauper state or a complete loss of family at some stage of their lives.

[page 363]
390
In the universal scheme of things, Shatabhisha relates to "bheshaja shakti" - the power of
healing. Its symbolism has pervasiveness above and support below' This obviously relates to the
three worlds - heaven, earth and the nether world. This symbolism shows that Shatabhisha is even
more peruasive than Puruashada, a power which it uses to heal the three worlds. The healing
process here is different ftom Ashvini, in the sense that it happens through genuine repentence, and
sustained effqrt is required over comparatively longer periods of time. The all-pervasive power that
media has in today's world is basically Shatabhisha's power and since this power is in the wrong
hands, it is not being used to heal or teach but to fool, chain, dumb down and devolute'
Mo[e d furrctioning :
This is an Active nakshatra. Ib active disposition springs directly from its moveable nature'
Aquarius as we know is an electric sign. This nakshaba embodies electricity in all its different forms.
In the present day and age where most of the communication is electronic, this asterism assumes
tremendous importance. This nakshatra is active and fast in much the same way as the fast moving
world of dectricity. :&.
Caste : -:i,:,-i
It belongs to the Butcher class and is thus involved in all butcher like or harsh activities, ranging
from advanced medical treatment of complicated diseases to just plain killing and hunting. The
natives highly influenced by this nakshatra can also be butcher like in their own self mortification or
have some twisted tendencies in regards to people and things. Since this nakshatra is not cruel or
fierce it is comparatively benevolent despite belonging to the butcher class'
Qenl.er :
It is a Neutral or Eunuch nakshatra, which means that it has a balance of masculine and
feminine attributes. Of course one would expect zero or nothingness to be genderlel:' Since it is a
:w O k.3,

[page 364]
391
neutral nakshatra it doesn't promote childbifth if it is connected with the 5s house or Jupiter in a
nativity. This neutral quality also makes it very dextrous in regards to its dealings with people, which
is ideal for media related activities.
tso[yparts d/ hfumor (Ayuwe[b Corutitution) :
The body part it relates to the most is the Jaw, which emphasizes its
eating, drinking and speaking. It is also related to the Right Thigh.
relation to the acts of
It belongs to th e Vab (airy) humor. This classification is clear from Shatabisha's strong association
with primari[ vata planets Saturn and Rahu.
Direction :
Its direction is ftom southwest to southeast.
9a[ns :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 60 40' - 10o 00'Aquarius, falls in Sagittarius Navamsa
and is ruled by Jupiter. This relates to the happy go lucky, optimistic and philanthropic side of this
nakshatra. This pada has a tendency to get carried away and so it is important for those under the
influence of this pada to choose the right thing to get carried away with. They are the kind who will
go about fanatically espousing their cause or belief.
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 10o 00' - 13o 20' Aquarius, falls in Capricom
Navamsa ruled by Saturn. This conveys the more practical and organizational aspect of this asterism.
This is the pada which relates to all material activities under the domain of Shatabhisha. One has to
watch out for excessive ambition in relation to the planeb posited in this pada.
The third pada or quafter of this asterism 13" 20' - 160 40' Aquarius, falls in Aquarius Navamsa
ruled by Saturn. This pada relates to the visionary futuristic and philosophical side of this nakshatra.

[page 365]
392
In its negative aspect it can be too eccentric and rebellious. Planets placed in this pada often do well
on the material plane as this is a vargottama position.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 160 40' - 20o 00' Aquarius, falls in Pisces Navamsa
ruled by Jupiter. This pada relates to the expansive, hallucinatory and illusory side of this nakshatra.
When favourable it can give great powers of healing and compassion. When afflicted it can make
one too ambiguous. Planets placed in this pada can often make the native lose themselves in one
form of intoxication or other. It is however good for activities relying on imagination like film-making
etc.
Qrofusiors :
Electricians and all those who work with electricity; Technology Experts; Radar & X-ray Expefts;
Chemotherapists; 45lronurts; Astronomers & Astrologers; Space Research; Pilots; Radio Operators;
Martial Arts Instructors & Martial Artists; Aeronautical, Rocket or Space Engineers; Aeronautical
Industry; Those who work in the Film and Television Industry; Movie Stars; Trend Setters;
Photographers; Science Fiction Writers & Enthusiasts; Nuclear Physicists and Physicists in general;
Those working in the Drug & Pharmaceutical Industry; Physicians & Surgeons; Herbologists;
Professions connected with the Production & Distribution of Alcohol; Drug Dealers, Pushers; Waste
Disposal & Rrycling Indusfry; Pimps & Prostitutes; Those who work in the Production of Plastics;
Petroleum & associated Industries; Bikers & Motor SporG; Automobile Industry; Sea Faring Professions;
Detectives, Puzzle Experts; Explorers, Hunters & Inventors; Yoga & Meditation gurus; Zen Experts.
.iitr:F-: Jdlii*.t ri9. i, :*il.:. rte
. rvr - -: -
Pfatu ::, .:::*ier ,.* fo l3ApO hrxl*s*fqrs bfif '''"$3t
High-tech Studios & Environments; Off Shore Driiling Stations; Space Stations; Airports;
Observatories & Planetariums; Physics & Chemistry Labs; Bars & Nightclubs especially Techno Clubs;
Factories; Hospitals; Nuclear Waste Dumps and Waste Dumps in general; Recycling Stations; Herbal
Centers; Water Treatment Plants & Reservoirs; Oceans; Sea-Side; Temples, Meditation, Yoga & Zen

[page 366]
393
Centres; Outer Space; Film & Television Studios;
connected to the abovementioned professions.
Processing Labs; Hunting Grounds; All places
i :..
.r:
9u* ('Essence) an[ tattwa (Ekment) :
Its basic essence is Tamas, which relates to inertia on all levels of existence. The quality of
ineftia in this nakshatra relates to its capacity for meditation and zen practices. It also relates to its
introvefted and reclusive nature and on the negative side, a tendency towards intoxkation with
drugs, alcohol, sex etc.
Its element is Ether. Ether is the element in nature which can mingle with every other element.
This associates this nakshatra with broad vision and wide open space. It relates to its meditative
capacity and the ability to attune oneself to the omnipresent emptiness. , ),
,.:'tt gr*3 -ri3fdit-* iE-,,. tstdf ;€i;;:' -1. ::rr:tii
Qo* EWd
It is a Rakshasa (demonic) nakshatra. This means that this nakshatra primarily seeks
independence and can be eccentric or oveftly negative in its outlook. It should not however be seen
as an oveftly evilasterism since it is mild b;.nature. Its demonic side is usually u,Stot. breaking
through attachments and conventions.
Oricntation d Disposition :
It is an Upward nakshatra. This means that it is an expansive nakshatra and most of its activities
happen above the ground. Since this asterism rules all telecommunications in general, one can see
how this fits in. One just has to look at the professions connected wisr this asterism to understand
its upward and expansive outlook.

[page 367]
394
Lunar Montfi d Datt : ri.: '
It can be seen as the co.ruler of the month Shraran, which is generally said to be ruled by
Shravana. One can expect the energies of this asterism to be stronger during the last 9 days of the
funar month of Shrauan, a period which corresponds to the month of August in the solar calender.
, Shatabhisha is also related to the Chaturdashi(l4d' tithi or day) of the waxing and waning
phases of the Moon's monthly cycle.
Arupicious Actittitits :
Good for signing business deals & contracts, land & housing deals; Education or learning activities;
Travel (especially over water); Bike riding; Acquiring new vehicles; Recreational ventures; Meditation
& yoga; Sexual activity; Studying astronomy & astrology; Medicine, therapies, rejuvenaUon & lift
enhancing activities; Media evenb; Technological activities; Visiting the sea-side'
Inmspbiorts Actiaitirs : .;n . q?--l
Not good for beginnings in general; Marriage; Childbirth; Fertility treatments; Law suits,
arguments; Negative or wrathful action; Not beneficial br too much socializing unless it is work
related; Not good for financial matters; Not good for buying new clothes or jewellery; Not good for
domestic activities.
etnutary fotfzr :
Shatabhisha is ruled by the planets - Saturn, Rahu and Uranus. Rahu is the main ruler of this
asterism. Shatabhisha is the pinnacle of Rahu's energy.
In its highest aspect this nakshatra relays the most knowledgeable and philosophical side of
Rahu. Rahu, being a child of maya, carries within itself the complete knowledge of nature's hidden
and complex functionings. The humanitarian, all inclusive, philosophical disposition of thb asteriSm,

[page 368]
395
when it is functioning through its higher aspect, is very in tune with Rahu's disposition in its higher
aspect. Rahu is that force that attempts to break down all boundaries of race, age, status, nationality
and religion to usher in a feeling of oneness of humanity, which in a sense embodies the spirit of
Aquarius. Functioning through its lower aspect, it relays the aspect of Rahu, which is responsible for
consumption and manufacturing of all types of alchohol, intoxicants and drugs. All the significations
of Rahu dealing with poisonous chemicals and substances also fall under the domain of this asterism.
How planets posited in Shatabisha will function in a nativity depends on Rahub functionings and
intentions.
Saturn is associated with this nakshatra being the ruler of Aquarius. Saturn, as we know, is a
planet associated with coldnesss, slowness, practicality, organization, melancholy, stillness, discipline,
introversion, perseverance and detachment. All these qualities find expression through this nakshatra.
However the emphasis here is on stillness, introversion, contemplation, seclusion and philanthropy
instead of the Capricom-Satum baits like qateriality and organizational capacity.
Uranus is the co-ruler of Aquarius and is a planet which relates to sudden events, eccentricity,
electricity, science and high technology. Shatabhisha, as we have seen, rules most of the electronic
media in today's world. Since most of the electronic media is dependant upon advancements in
technology, the relationship between Uranus and Shatabhisha is immediately clear.
It is interesting to note that Vedic Astrologers have chosen the name Varuna for Uranus. Varuna
as we have seen earlier is the ruling deity of this nakshatra. Another interesting aspect to this
correfation is that the name "Uranus" is derived from the Greek root " Otlaronu!'.lust like Varuna,
Ouaronus was the God of the seas and oceans. Linguistically, it is pretty evident that the sanskit
term 'Varuna' metamorphosized into Ouaronus during the transference of Vedic knowledge through
ages and civilizations.
Rahu-Saturn, Rahu-Uranus and Saturn-Uranus conjunctions in a chart convey simihr energies
to Shatabisha.

[page 369]
396
does well here but it can
ilowek and AIpfinbe* :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 6o 40' - 10o 00' Aquarius corresponds to "Go" as in
Godwin, i::.- ..1 :: ,::
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 10o 00' - 13o 20' Aquarius corresponds to "Sa" as
in Sally.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 13" 20' - 15" 40' Aquarius corresponds to "Si" as in
Simon.
The fourth pada or quafter ofthis asterism 16o 40' - 20o 00'Aquarius corresponds to "Su" as in
Sun,
In the Sanskit alphabet Shatabhishak corresponds to "Lam" and consequently its mantra is
"Om Lam".
Seryat We U Compatihi[itY :
Its sexual animal is a Mare. This makes it most compatible with Agtini whose sexual animal is
represented by a horse. Aswini and Shatabhisha share a deep relationship on many levels. For
example, they are the two nakshatras which deal with heating and rejuvenation. It is the view of the
ancient seers that diseases which begin in Shatabhisha can only be cured in Aswini'
For sexual & marital compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the tables on pages 457
& 458.

[page 370]
397
'E-soterir :
The etheric aspect of this asterism relates to the subtle electric forces of the etheric or heavenly
realm' It is a deeply mystical asterism which can open one's conciousness to the highest realms. Its
empty circle symbolism highlights the truth that all creation arises from nothingness and dissolves
into nothingness.
The present day phenomenon of "crop circles", is, in the author's view, directly connected with
this nakshatra. These crop circles remain a big mystery to all those who don't want to accept any
reality other than material. 90o/o of them are formed in the wheat fields of a small agricultural area
in Engfand, known as the Wltshire Plains. The interesting thing is that many ancient sites like
Stonehenge and Silbury Hitt lie within this small area.
Many of these crop circles are complicated geometrical patterns based on universal mathematical
principles like the golden ratio 1.618, aka. the'golden mean'. Some of them are very similar to the
ancient mandalas and the petalled sacred chakraswhich lie within our astral bodies. They are called
crop circles just because of the extensive use of circle in their complicated patterns. The important
thing about them is that they are all made with unerring finesse and not a single wheat plant is
damaged or out of place in the finished patterns.
The crop circles, some of them spreading over 300 ft, are formed within seconds and only one
has ever been filmed forming. Many people who think they are hoaxes have failed to make even a
simple accurate circle in the fields in one whole night. The film clearly showed four roundish white
lights (earth spirits) making a circle within 2-3 seconds. The film's validity is confirmed by the fact
that the newly formed crop circle was open for public viewing on the same day.
Shatabhisha, as we know, likes to baffie through mysteries and puzzles, and in that way leads
people into discovering the real truths of the universe. Despite all the hopelessness in our times,
there seems to be hope for the future, considering that the other side is still communicating with us
even if in a secretive playful way. The messages of these crop circles ane very clear to those who

[page 371]
398
have real knowledge and the moment a ceftain number of people reach that understanding, we
would all be living in a different world'
Qotra (Cetzstiat Lbwage) :
This nakshatra is related to the Sage Atri, one of the seven celestial sages looking after the
affairs of our galaxy. The name of this sage translates into "one who devours", which is in keeping
with the essential demoniacal nature of this nakshatra. shatabisha has a dissoluting naulre and is
very much in keeping with the job assigned to this particular sage'
fumedia[ :
Healing measures can be used for those suffering from the bad effects of this nakshatra, which
may manifest as health problems related to the body parts it rules, or problems with drug and
alcohol addiction etc. one can also strengthen this nakshatra's energy to increase one's chances for
fame in the media or progress in meditation'
The best way is to recite its root mantra "Om Lam" 108 times on Saturday and during its lunar
month. while doing this, one should sit facing south west or south east. The other more potent way
is worship of Lotd Shiua in any form one is attracted to'
One can wear all shades of blues and neon electric cglours when undeftaking activities related
to this asterism.
lEapnpft :
Ramakrishna paramahana,the leading spiritual light in the late 19h century had his Ascendant,
Sun as well as Mercury placed in Shatabhisha making him a triple Shatabhisha. Through his life the
highest indications of Shatabhisha found expression'

[page 372]
399
The famous singer and entertainer, Elvis Presley, has his Moon placed in Shatabhisa. His life is
a demonstration of the name and fame Shatabisha can bestow in today's day and age. Shatabisha
surely made him media sawy, but later in his lifu, it also made him a victim of its negative, intoxhative,
delusory and self-destructive tendencies.
Misceffarcous :
According to Varahamihira, "those with Moon in Shatabisha are truthful but harsh and cruel in
their speech. They are always eager to conquer their enemies and suffer much grief in isolation.
They have independence of thought and action but are often seen acting without thought," Even a
cursory look at our example Elvis Presley and his life, will testifr that even in modern times
Varahamihirab meanings have some wlidity.
***

[page 373]
25. Yuru bh"dr"p"d" 2oooo' Aguarius - j'Za,fisc"s

[page 374]
25.
In tfu Sky t
Puruabhadrapada, the culmination of Jupiterian energy, is represented in the celestial firmament
by two bright stars in the constellation of Pegasus, which the ancient vedic seers saw as being
representative of the front legs of a funeral cot (or sleeping bed). Pegasus itself was seen as a full
funeraf cot (or sleeping bed). These two starc are known in modem astronomy as Alpha-@asi
(Ma*ab) and Beta-Pqasi (ScheaQ. The bright constellation of Pegasus lies directly on top of the
astronomical constellations of Aquarius and Pisces.
The two stars of this asterism make a straight line (almost perpendicular to the ecliptic belt) at
the juncture of the constellations Aquarius and Pisces, This is in harmony with the fact that this
asterism connects the signs Aquarius and Pisces. Alpha-Pegasi, which can be said to represent the
paft in Aquarius, lies closer to the zodiacal ecliptic and has a visual magnitude of 2.49, while Beta-
Pegasi, which can be said to represent the part in Pisces, lies further away and is slightly brighter
with a visual magnitude of 2.47. Both of them can be easi[ located in the night sky.
A@me :
"Purvabhadrapada" translates into - "the former (one who possesses) lucky feet". Its alternative
name is "Puruaproshthapada'l which translates into "the former (one who possesses) the feet of a
st@I".
nurraSfrnirapa{n
(20000'Aquarius - 3020' Pisces)

[page 375]
404
These translations clearly highlight the problems one encounters when translating Sanskrit
terms into English. The above translations seem odd and confusing and don't seem to convey much
regarding the nature or functioning of this a$e6ign. As we shall find out later they just relate to its
ruling deity.
Sytnfiot :
Its main symbol is the'front part of a funeral cot'. A funeral cot denotes our exit from the world.
In astrology, the sign Pisces, or the 12h house in the chart signifies this exit. Since this asterism
begins the sign of Pisces, it is appropriate that it is ascribed the front legs of the funeral cot. The
front part of a normal sleeping bed can also be seen as the symbol of this asterism. Since the 12h
house relates to sleep, which can be seen as a temporary form of death, a sleeping bed would also
relate to this asterism. It signifies the moment in time when after doing our worldly duties and
mingling with friends (Aquarian or 11h house activities), we prepare for retiring to bed in the night.
, Its alternative symbol is'a man with two faces'. As you can see in the image for this nakshatra,
one face wears a benign look while the other one appears mad, violent and destructive' This relates
to the Jekylland Hyde character of this asterism. It can always put up a normal, socially acceptable
and cheerful front on the outsi& while holding its darker side inside at all Umes.
A'sword' is also used as its symbol by many scholars. The sword obviously relates to the
process of "cutting off". The cutting off process relates to the destructive, dissoluting.side of nature
and associates this nakshatra with all kinds of pains, injuries, accidents, deaths and endings.
Another alternative symbol for this asterism is'a single ray of Sun'. This relates to the gloomy'
desolate aspect of this nakshatra where all hope is at the minimum and the light at the end of the
tunnef is very faint. Those readers who are conversant with the novel 'Count of Monte Christo" by
Alexander Dumas, can easily see how this applies to the experience of the lead character Edmund
Dantes, whife he was imprisoned on the remote island of Elb.

[page 376]
405
Deity :
It has an obscure ruling deity with the name of Aja-Ekapada, which translates into "tle one
footed goat". Its alternative meaning, which carries a cosmic pun, is "the one footed unbom one".
This mysterious creature is a goatheaded monster with one leg, who forms paft of the entourage of
Rudra (the fierce form of Shiva).
Surprisingly, Aja-Ekapada, a Vedic character, can be easily found on the card no. ./5 in the
Western Tarot pack This card is called 'The Devilu and is supposed to signify the evil and dark side
of life in general. This goat headed creature carries much of the same meanings from the Vedic point
of view, except the fact that the destruction and ruin it brings is supposed to be divinely ordained.
We can see that the name of this asterism also relates directly to this one footed deity.
The sign Pisces is seen to symbolise feet and since this asterism has only one paft in Pisces, it
can be said to have only one foot. It is interesting to note that this one footed dark deity has gained
enormous prominence in the present world age of Kali-Yuga.It can be seen in all major important
centres of the Western civilization. All the secret societies and brotherhoods like the ftemasns,
Club of Rome and the llluminati consider this goat god as their main deity. In these circles he is
known as Baphomet
Since our present day world is run by a secret elite group, which has strong connections with
the above mentioned secret societies, it is not hard to understand why there is so much unnecessary
violence and bloodshed being perpetuated on our planet. Aja-Ekapada can be seen as the ruling
deity of all types of black magic and that is why individuals Ceeply influenced by this asterism are
attracted to or practise black magic.
In the image representing this nakshatra, the reader can see skulls and bones lying all around,
which form a secondary symbol for this asterism. One can see that the skull and bones symbol has
always been associated with danger as it is displayed in dangerous places like high voltage areas etc,
In this light it is interesting to note that there's a secret order in the United States known as the
'Skulls & Bones Society", of which prominent American presidents have been members!

[page 377]
406
Finally, the supreme ruling deity of this asterism is Rudra, the fierce form of Shiva. This asterism
carries the destructive aspect of Shiva in much the same way as Ardra. fhe difference is that here
Rudra represents the final dissolution on all planes, whib in Ardra the chaotic destructive energy
only operates on the mental, emotional planes. As a result, this asterism can be much more cruel
and merciless in comparison to Ardra. This can be said to be the place where the Universe loses its
mind!
This is basically a purificatory energy, When the old has fallen into decay it has to be destroyed
for the new to take birth. The destructive fires of Rudra aim to achieve exactly that. On a more
personal level, souls pay for their past life bad karmas through penance and retribution under the
burning fires of this nakshatra.
Afature d furrctioning :
If there is one word which could sum up this nakshatra it would be'diabolical'. A lot of the so
called negative human traits like paranoia, pessimism, debauchery violence, hedonism, thirst for
the macabre, lying, deceit, cruelty and morbidity can be ascribed to this nakshatra. This nakshatra is
mainly concerned with transformation. Those under the strong influence of this asterism have the
huge task of witnessing and understanding the lower dark side of life without getting their hands
dirty.
Although most scholars don't recognise this fact, this is the most intense amongst all the
nakshatras. Since all its negative aspects can only in essence be manifested through the ego, humility
becomes the most impoftant thing for Purvabhadrapada natives. One of the few good qualities of
this nakshatra is that it is devoted to those it respects. This again however is a double edged sword,
since many a Umes its object of veneraUon is not very wholesome.
Ramakrishna Paramahansa (the famous 19th century saint), who has his Moon in
Purvabhadrapada, was devoted to lGli, the fierce goddess. The dark deity Kali, despite being fierce,
is ultimately benevolent. This devotion helped him rise above all the negative Purvabhadrapada

[page 378]
407
characteristics, but many under this nakshatra's influence take to worshipping demonic and devilish
deities and spoil their karma for many lives. Thus we can see that it is very impoftant for the natives
under this nakshatra to find the right thing to get devoted to from the very beginning.
Another good quality of this nakshatra is that it is very sincere and hardworking, even if its
goals are not so wholesome. It has tremendous perseverance and will go to any lengths to achieve
its objective. In fact a lot of Purva Bhadrapada naUves end up engaging in bad karma because they
are ready to do'just about anything'to obtain their objectives.
If a case study of mass murderers, homicides and genocides was carried out, it would be found
that most of the people involved would have some strong connection with Purvabhadrapada. This
nakshatra relates both to the persecuted and the persecutor.
More evolved souls usually use this nakshatra's energy to mortify themselves instead of others.
Af f the sages like Vishwamita, who underwent extreme penance, are basically utilising this nakshatra's
energy. Even today in India, one citn see a lot of sdhusinvolved in intense practices involving self
tofture and self moftification. A Purvabhadrapada native is ready to stand on one foot for ten years
or even more, if they are convinced that it is going to bring them their desired result.
After reading the above description, the reader may be surprised to know that alot of times
Purvabhadrapada natives cannot be distinguished from the rest, just because they have a very
strong capacity to fit in with the contemporary societal structure. They are normal people with nine
to five office jobs, who spealg eat and dress like everyone else, and no one can suspect the kind of
things they are up to in tteir private lives. They usually keep their idiosyncrasies and nebrious
activities secret.
The only way of spotting a Purvabhadnpada person is their highly strung, neruous demeanour
along with an overtly serious look. They are the ones who are likely to snap first in any confrontational
situation. They however try to carry a happy look and act amicably in social gatherings.
They are basically two faced people, the kind who work on normal day jobs, and in the nights
they can be found in fetish clubs, banging heads at hard core heavy metal concerts, entertaining

[page 379]
408
macabre fantasies, practising dark tantric rituals or plotting and carrying out violent or criminal
activities ...Purvabhadrapada natives are very susceptible to extreme views and often end up being
part of e)Greme furdannntalist groups.
Not every purvabhadrapada person gives physical expression to their negative energies' The
more evolved souls learn to fight the battle between light and dark within their own minds and
hearts. Alot bf common everyday Puruabhadra pada people, instead of being the perpetrators, end
up being the victims. Creative artists who have this nakhatra strongly placed in their chafis' can
often be seen channeling its energy, by implementing all the dark side of life in their art, whether it
be writing, music or drama.
purvabhadrapada natives, like everything else, tend to oscillate between extremes in the sexual
sphere.A|lkindsofsexualperversionsandphobiasareseentoori9inateinthisnakshatra.
Regretfulness is another of the prominent qualities of this nakshatra. Being contemplative at
some inner level, its natives are often seen brooding over the past, tormenting themselves for all the
wrongs theY have done.
On a material plane such natives are stingy in regards to money. However their one peculiarity
is that they are always ready to place all of their wealth at the disposal of their spouse, partner,
teacher or ctuse. Their capacity for revenge holds no equal among nakshatras' Once again Alexander
Dumas,s novel, ,'Count of Monte Christo", reveals how this emotion can be taken to the extreme'
In the universal scheme of things, Purvabhadrapada relates to "yajamana udyamana shakti" -
the power to raise the evolutionary level. Its symbolism has humanity above, and the astral regions
below. This imagery suggests that Purvabhadrapada acts as a bridge between the consciousness on
the material and non-material planes. It is this bridge which is blocked in majority of the humanity in
the present times. puruabhadrapada has the power to raise one's evolutionary level through internal
puriftcatbn brought about by the raging celestial fires of penance. I

[page 380]
409
Modt of fututioning
It is supposed to be a Passive nakshatra, but this does not mean that it does not or cannot act
when required. Its passivity relates to the fact that it takes its Ume in forming and visualizing its
goals and does not act in haste. It is usually in no hurry to achieve its ends.
Caste :'
Surprisingly, this asterism is given the Brahmana caste by ancient Vedic seers. It is however
easy to understand the why of it with a closer look. It is ruled by Jupiter, the most brahmanical
among planets. It is related to the universal law, that power and knowledge can be achieved through
penance, and this asterism is very capable of achieving both. What it finally does with that power
and knowledge is another matter.
Qender :
It is a male nakshatra in keeping with its male deities. Even Jupiter, one of its planetary rulers,
is a male planet.
Bodyparts d l{urcr (Ayune[b Constitution) :
It mainly relates to the Sides of the Body. This includes the Ribs, Abdomen and the Sides of the
Legs. It is also an indicator of the Left Thigh and Soles of the Feet. It is interesting to note that
patting the left thigh was considered an invitation for war or an aggressive act meant to cajole or
humiliate others. In the Vedic epic Mahabharata, Duryodhana did a similar gesture when he asked
Draupdito come and sit on his thigh, and Bhimatooka vow to break off his thigh in battle and drink
the blood from it (a very Purva bhadrapada act!)
It is a predominantly Vata (Nr) nakshatra in keeping with its expansive nature.

[page 381]
410
Directint . !i
Ib directions are west and southeast, leaning a little closer towards east as compared to south.
gsdos (Qtartus)
The first pada or quafter of this asterism 20o 00' - 23o 20'Aquarius, falls in Aries Navamsa and
is ruled by Mars. This pada brings out the most aggressive side of this nakshatra. The energy here is
more mental. Such natives will do well to control their temper, aggression and violence. It gives
tremendous determination to achieve one's objective.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 23o 20' - 260 40' Aquarius, hlls in Taurus Navamsa
ruled by Venus. This pada relates to the more indulgent side of this nakshatra. The energy here is
more eafthy and the natives are likely to give some physical expression to the aforementioned dark
sides of this nakshatra
The third pada or quafter of this asterism 26" 40' - 30o 00' Aquarius, falls in Gemini Navamsa
ruled by Mercury. This pada e)eresses this nakshatra's energy through more communicative means
and makes the native curious, This is the lightest pada of this intense nakshatra.
The foufth pada or quafter of this asterism 0o 00' - 3o 20' Pisces, falls in Cancer Navamsa ruled
by Moon. This pada has an extremely diabolical quality, in the sense that it can be extremely benign
or extremely dangerous. It relates both to the persecuted and the persecutor. Such natives can be
found in all walks of life and are most socially adept in comparison with the other three padas.
{Profusioru :
Morticians and all professions relating to death or the death process like Coffin Makers, Cemetary
Keepers etc.; Surgeons and contemporary Medical Practitioners (basically those who administer
poisons as remedies); Fundamentalists, Radicals, Fanatics, Terrorists etc.; Horror, Mystery and
Sci-Fi Writers; Present day Psychiatrists (who often end up making things worse); The dark side of

[page 382]
411
the entertainment industry; The dark side of the ruling elite; Pornagraphic Industry; Weapon Makers
and Users; Occultisbs dealing with the dark side, Black Magicians; Perpetuators of dark technologies;
Leather Industry; Extreme AsceUcs involved in self mortification (like the famous Aghoras); police
Departments particularly Homicide Squads; Soldiers; Metal Industry; All professions involving the
use of fire and high temperatures; Those who deal with toxic substances and highly polluting waste
products; Enemies of the environment like Lumber Jacks; Environmental Activists; pharmaceutical
Industry.
lP[aces :
Cemetaries, Morgues, Cremation Grounds; Factories; Heavy industries of all types; Land Fills;
Dark Alley Ways; Centres for Occult Studies and practices of a dark nature; Operation Theatres and
Terminal Illness Wards; Asylums and Penitentiaries; Churches; Top Secret Military Research Bases;
Atomic Power Plants; Places where high technology equipment is kept; Night Clubs and all other
places associated with dark entertainmen! The places related to the above mentioned professions
in general.
Quna (Essence) an[ tattuta (Efement) :
The ancient Vedic seers saw it as a Sattwic nakshatra. Once again, this classification relates
mainly to its capacity for penance, detachment and generosity. It must be kept in mind that its
generosity only extends to those close to it by family or association.
It belongs to the Ether element. This is primarily to do with its planetary ruler Jupiter, who also
hasa primarily etheric constitution. This element relates to the dissoluting aspect of this asterism. In
a way even murdering a person is nothing but an act of separating their etheric, subtle body frorn
their physical body.

[page 383]
412
Qono $ype) :
Itis a Manusha(human) nakshatra. Going by its qualities one would expect it to be a demonic
nakshatra, but it is impoftant to remember an old dictum from Vedic wisdom here - "Humans are
capable of more demonk acts than the demons and more godly acts than the gods' "
Ori.entation d DisPosition :
It is a Downward nakshatra. This means that it is concerned with what is below the surface of
things. It also suggests a person whose glance is downwards instead of upwards' It also relates to its
capacity for deep research of all kinds. Natives predominanuy influenced by Purvabhadrapada are
verygoodatkeepingsecretsandcan,tbetakenontheirfacevalue.
Vedic seers regarded it as an Ugn (cruel & fierce) nakshatra. This doesn't come as much of a
surprise after understanding its essential nature'
Lunar Montfi an{ Doa : '"
It can be seen as the ruler of the waning part (first nine days) of the month known as Bhadnph'
This period usually corresponds to the month of september in the solar calender'
purvabhadrapada is also related 6 Chaturdashi(l4t'tithi or day) of the waxing and waning
phases of the Moon's monthly cycle.
Atupiciorts Actirtitits
All dangerous, uncertain and risky activities; All activities of a mechanical or technological
nature; Holding funeral services; Putting an end to things; Exploring Death Issues; Agricultural
activities; All activiUes connected with water like sailing etc'

[page 384]
413
Inauspicioru :
Generally unfavourable for most activities except those mentioned above; Especially unfavourable
for beginning new things or initiations of all kinds; Not good for travelling, sex, marriage and dealing
with the government or higher authorities. Most of the actions carried out under its influence often
end up causing pain, anxiety, regre! sorrow or e)ftreme difficulty.
Ptarutary fo[er :
The planets associated with this nakshatra are Saturn, Jupiter, Uranus, Neptune and Ketu.
Jupiter is its main planetary ruler. Saturn and Uranus are connected to this asterism because of their
corulership of Aquarius,while Neptune and Ketu connect to the poftion of this asterism which falls in
Pisces.
It is important to note that even though Rahu is a coruler of Aquarius, Rahu does not relate to
the part of Aquarius where this asterism lies (20" to 30o). Rahu's energy culminates in the previous
asterism shatabishak (60 42'to 20o Aquarius).
Saturn primarily relates to the grief causing and disciplined aspect of this asterism. It also
poinb to the fact that this asterism always tends to physically carry out its dark functionings. Saturn
also provides the detachment aspect, which can be best seen through the self-tormenting ascetic
standing on one foot (see the nakshatra's image).
Uranus relates to the futuristic and technological aspect of this asterism. The most famous
among the modern science fictions, "Sbr Wats", displays the Uranian aspect of this nakshatra. It
can be seen that this nakshatra has a tendency to go overboard with technology, and in its hands
technology always ends up being used for destructive purposes. This is the asterism which furthers
anti-nature and dehumanizing technologies like microchipping, androids and mindless geneuc
manipulation.

[page 385]
414
It is hard for some people to understand how a benefic planet like Jupiter can rule such a
malefic asterism. In order to explain this mystery we would like to once again bring into the picture
the two faced nature of this asterism. This nakshatra is very capable of putting up a Jupiterian,
socialry acceptable, well mannered and conseryative front. It is also skilled at earning money and
Jupiter as we know is the natural significator of wealth, However its means of earning money are
always questionable. It is an expansive asterism in keeping with Jupiter's naturaltendency. It however
uses its expansiveness for fufthering darker/destructive causes. Its Jupiterian side also comes out
when it is ready to place all of its belongings and resources at the disposal of its partners or those
whom it admires and resPects.
lupiter! energy culminates in this nakshatra. This means that at some stage, Purvabhadrapada
goes beyond the Jupiterian values which uphold society. Once the moralistic and preservative influence
of Jupiter is finished, the stage is set for destruction and dissolution. This process can be seen as
Vishnu€topping his preservation activities, which sustain the drama of life, so that Shiva's destructive
energies are let loose without restraint.
Neptune relates to the fantasy aspect of this nakshatra. All its Uranian futuristic visions like
,'Star Wars" have been made into hugely successful movies. Neptune, as we know, rules the cinematic
reaf m and this asterism has a strong hold over the modern day showbiz capital, Hollywood' One can
plainfy see the energy of this asterism being relayed through 9}o/o of the movies being churned out
by Hollywood, especially in the last 20 years or so. Its fantasy aspect goes into other areas as well,
which we have already mentioned in its nature and disposition'
Ketu comes in touch with this nakshatra through the "little foot" it has in the sign Pisces. Ketu,
as we know, is the most destructive and detached among all the planets, and this asterism requires
that energy to be able to inflict torture upon itself or others. When it is working on an internal,
benefic level, the attachments are destroyed without any self mortification. When it is working on an
individualized but external, benefic level, this nakshatra tries to control and sublimate inner desires
through external means like tormenting the body through extreme penance. When working in a
malefic, externalized way, it reaks havoc on its surroundings, and this is where we get the cold
blooded mur&rer, serhl killer, the war general or behind-the-scenes manipulator'

[page 386]
415
In general astrological terms, the conjunctions of Mars/Saturn/Rahu/Ketu/Uranus or Neptune
in cruel and harsh nakshatras have an energy similar to Purvabhadrapada.
, Not many planets fare well in Purvabhadrapada. Only a well aspected, well fortified Jupiter is
good here. Saturn can also give okay results in Purva bhadrapada, if Jupiter is well placed in the
chart. A well placed Ketu, especially in the Pisces pa4 can generate detrchment in a posiUve way.
'lowels ur"{ Atpffie* :
The first pada (20" to 23" 20'Aquarius) relates to "Se" as in the name "Seth".
The second pada (23o 20'to 260 40'Aquarius) relates to "So" as in the name "Somalia".
The third pada (26" 40'to 30"00' Aquarius) relates to "The" as in "Then".
The fourth pada (0" to 3o 20' Pisces) relates to 'Di* as in the name "Divali".
In the Sanskrit alphabet Purvabhadrapada corresponds to the letters "Vam" and "Stlam", and
consequently its mantras are "Om Vam" and "Om Sham".
Sery.at We a Compatilitity :
Its sexual animal is a Lion, which points towards an aggressive sexual nature and attitude. It
likes to be the dominant partner in sexual union and in many cases does not have a healthy respect
for its partner. One can notice in the image of this nakshatra, the lion is a roaring lion and not a
tame, gentfe one as is the case with Dhanishtha.
For sexual & marital compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the tables on pages 457
& 458.

[page 387]
416
T-soteric :
Its ruling deity, as we have seen earlier, is a mysterious figure and finds little mention in the
Vedic texts. Surprisingly, it is a much revered deity in the present time and human sacrifices are
carried out under its name by today's ruling elite. This may come as a shock to many of the readers,
but as the saying goes, "Fact is always stranger than fiction!"
This asterism relates to all the dark deities of all ancient cultures, who were supposed to require
sacrifice of some live thing, in the form of an animal or human being. The blood sacrifices of the
Mayan civilization are notoriously famous.
This nakshatra is the consummation point of Jupiter's energy, which in effect means that Jupiter's
benefic nature cannot intervene in the destructive acts of this asterism. The universal function of
maintenance, so dear to Jupiter, holds litUe meaning for the destructive, dissoluting energies of this
nakshatra. Since this nakshatra relates to the extremely destructive types among Shiva's entourage,
it deals specifically with the unrestrained aspect of Shiva'
'' The imagery of the'two-faced man' (refer to the image), on an esoteric level, refers to the
dying process. Each of us when we die get to face all our actions in the eafthly realm, and at the
same Ume we get to peer into the astral plane, commonly referred to as "the world of the dead. "
Qotra (Ce{zstiat Lineage) :
this n'akshatra is related to the Sage Vashishta, one of the seven celestial sages looking after
the affairs of our galaxy. The name of this sage translates into "the possessor of wealth". This seems
to be apt considering the fact that this nakshatra seems to be good at acquiring wealth; especially in
today's world, as Puruabhadrapada seems to have taken complete control of all the resources of our
planet. On the other hand, Vashishta is renowned for his extreme penances in keeping with
Puruabhadrapada's essential inclinations.

[page 388]
417
kmedin[:
For those suffering from bad effects resulting from afflictions to this nakshatra, the best remedial
measure is worship of Shiva. The practice of lGrma Yoga, which involves carrying out one's divinely
ordained path in life, is the best way to neutralize the bad effects of this nakshatra.
Repetition of the root mantra of this nakshatra - "Om Vam" and "Om Sham" 108 times when
Moon transits this nakshatra and in the waning half of the lunar month of Bhadrapada is sure to
reduce suffering and bring enlightenment into a person's life.
Persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this nakshatra can also increase the
good effects through the above mentioned ways. It is helpful for them to wear light colours like light
blue. Leather apparels and black colours should be avoidd as mucfr as possible.
Eagntpfe :
Michael Jackson, the famous enteftainer, has his Moon placed in this asterism. This nakshatra's
energy can be found expressed in his later music, especially music videos like "Thriller". He definitely
does not seem to have a normal sexual life and has been accused of child molestation. The self
moftification of this asterism is evident from his continuous surgery which he is supposed to be
undeftaking to reach a state of physical pefection. He is also said to have suffered a lot of abuse in
his early childhood, which can be seen from Moon's placement in this nakshaba in his fourtr house,
the house of childhood and upbringing.
Misce[.farcous :
Varahamihira states that "those who have Moon in Puruabhadrapada are good at eaming money,
are stingy and are liable to place their wealth at the disposal of their paftners. They speak distincily
but tend to suffer from grief. "All these characteristics seem to fit in with our example, and curiously
enough they would easily fit in with 90o/o of the present day ruling elite !
***

[page 389]
26. Q*at bh.drp.dr ,"zo'1i"""" - | 6"+c,1i".""

[page 390]
26.
Umro6fiadrapa{4
(3020' Pisces - 16040' Pisces)
In tfu SKy t
tJttarabhadrapada,the apex of Saturnine energy, is represented in the celestial firmament by
two bright stars, one of which lies in the constellation of fugasus, while the other is seen as being
part of the constellation Andromda. The ancient vedic seers saw these stars as being representaUve
of the back legs of a funeral cot (or sleeping bed). Also the ancients saw these two stars forming a
rectangular bed (which is now known as the "Square of Pqasul'), along with the two stars of
Puruabhadrapada.
These two stars, which lie in Pegasus and Andromeda respectively, are known in modern
astronomy as Gamma-Pegasi(Algenib) and Alpha-Andromedae (Alphera2). They can be seen lying
directly above the constellation of Pisces. Gamma-Pegasi has a visual magnitude of 2.84, and lies
closer to the zodiacal ecliptic. Alpha-Andromedae is the brighter of the two with a visual magnitude
of 2.06 and lies farther away from the zodiacal ecliptic. Both of them can be easif located in the
night sky through spotting Andromeda, one of the brightest constellations in the night sky.
lrtgtme :
"Uttarabhadrapada" translates into - "the latter (one who possesses) lucky feet'. Its alternative
name is "Uttaraproshthapada'i which translates into "the latter (one who posseses) the feet of a
stool". These names arrd meanings are a direct result of this asterism forming a pair with the

[page 391]
422
previous asterism Purvabhadrapada and don't convey much regarding the nature or functioning of
this asterism.
Synhot:
Its main symbol is the'back part of a funeral cot'. A funeral cot denotes our exit from the world,
and the sign Pisces, or the 12b house in the chart, signifies this exit. Since this asterism forms the
heart of the sign of Pisces, it is appropriate that it is ascribed the back legs of the funeral cot, while
its counterpart, Purvabhadrapada,is ascribed the front legs. In a way it represents our initial state
after death, while Puruabhadrapada can be seen as relating to the actual process of dying. The back
part of a normal sleeping bed can also be seen as the symbol of this asterism. Since the 12h house
relates to sleep, which can be seen as a temporary form of death, a sleeping bed would also relate
to this asterism. Uttarabhadrapada signifies the deep sleep state, in which the dream activity is at
the minimum, and we go to the depths of our unconscious. It can however be also representative of
all dreams and dreamlike states. ,
In our view, its altemative symbol is a serpent with two and a half coils (see the image),
symbof izing the kundalini, the primeval life force lying at the base of the spine in humans. This
asterism symbolizes enlightenment through the awakening of all the seven vital centres through the
movement of the kundalini. This process of kundalini awakening is actually started in Anuradha,
which can be seen as an associate asterism, in the sense that Satum rules both of these asterisms.
As we discussed in the section dealing with Anuradha, Anuradha is the initiator of this process, while
uttarabhadrapada is the culmination point of this process.
Deity :
Its deity is known by the name Ahir Bhudhanya and in keeping with the basic energy of this
asterism, is a figure shrouded in mystery. His peculiar name roughly translates into "Serpent of the
Depths" or "Serpent that lies beneath the surface of the earth". Most of the Vedic texts don't say

[page 392]
423
much about him, except the mention of him being a serpent god dwelling in the primeval depths.
Even the west has its own share of imagined or othenrrise mysterious undenalater serpent creatures
like Scotland's Lrchnss Monster Vedic mythology, however, is replete with stories of serpent beings
which reside at the bottom of bodies of water like lakes, rivers and oceans. These beings also reside
in all the nether worlds. Ahir Bhudhanya can be seen as a collective composite of all these serpent
beings.
There is an obvious connection of the serpent forces, revered by all ancient cultures, with this
asterism. The reader can refer to the author's previous work, 'The Rahu-Ketu Experience" Sagar
Publiations,Indial 'The Key Of Life' Lotus Press, USA) for gaining a more detailed understanding
of how these forces are central to the'universal plan. Ahir Bhudhanya was seen as the deity responsible
for maintaining the fertility of the earth. The symbolism of a serpent lying at the core of the earth,
who maintains eafth's structure and fertility, can be found in all ancient cultures. In the west, plutq
the planet seen as the lord of the underworld, was given a simibr portfolio.
Ahir Bhudhanya is a more wise and compassionate deity in comparison with A1?-Ekapda(please
refer to the section on Purvabhadrapada). Its essential nature is akin to the western Neptunian god-
figure, which is not very interested in revealing itself. Like Neptune, it presides over the celestial
ocean. Even Vishnu, the preserver among the Trinity, has a simibr symbolism as can be seen from
his lying on a serpent bed on top of the celestial ocean image
Finally Shiua, the destroyer among the cosmic Trinity, can be seen as the main presiding deiff
of this asterism, even though its symbolism relates to Vishnu. This asterism has a dissolution aspect
to it in the guises of death, transformation and enlightenment through destruction of forms - Shiva,s
domain. Shiva also carries a serpent around his neck I
ij.
A{ature U Dbposition :
The first thing which must be said here, is that it is very hard to pin down the exact nature of
this nakshatra. It can function in a variety of ways and fashion itself according to its needs and

[page 393]
424
surroundings. Since wisdom is the key word for this nakshatra, the native strongly under its influence
acts according to the needs of the moment rather than from any instinctual archetype'
The real motives of this nakshatra are always very hard to know' Natives under its strong
influence are as elusive as the serpent of the deep sea. Just like the ocean carries a whole different
variety of plants and creatures, this nakshatra has room for many different qualities' natures and
expresslons.
Despite its apparent flexibility, it is quite a fixed nakshatra, which is usually very determined to
achieve its set goals. Flexibility here is just a means to an end' This is the wise old man amongst the
nakshatras. It never acts hastily. In fact many a times it can postpone actions too long for its own
good. In a lot of cases it can just be p|ain lary, in both physica| and mental matters.
A|otcanbeunderstoodaboutthisnakshatrabyunderstandingthenatureandro|eoftheo|d
wise chief archetype of indigenous native tribes' Its wisdom has been gained from experience' It is
calculative when it comes to achieving its ends. These natives always try to keep the big picture in
mind while making plans, decisions and the like. Uttarabhadrapada likes to do evefihing in a controlled
fashion with care and restraint. Its intentions are usually benevolent. Its ambitions are not self
servinganditisful|ofqua|itieslikeempathy,understandingandsympathy.
Uttarabhadrapada natives usually make very good counsellors' water as we know has the
ability to extinguish any fire. In the same way the cooling waters of this nakshatra can ease and cool
out all fiery emotions like anger, revenge, jealousy etc. Even in all the native tribes of the past'
everyoneusedtoturntothee|derorwisemanofthetribetofindso|aceanddirectionintheir
troubled times. The level of compassion this nakshatra can show will obviously depend upon the
evolutionary status of the soul in question'
Theca|culativeaspectofthisnakshatraconnectsittoa||thesciencesconcernedwith
understanding the functionings of the universal mind, like Astrology, Numerology, Yoga, Meditauon'
Divination etc.

[page 394]
425
Natives with Uttarabhadrapada rising on the Ascendant usually have a serene and calm
countenance. They try their best to remain happy even in difficult, disturbing and unfavourable
circumstances. Uttarabhadrapada has a tendency to give one a large body with broad shoulders.
This can be gauged from the fact that oceans are quite expansive. Such natives are usually short in
height, with a tendency towards weight gain, especially with age. Uttarabhadrapada usually produces
shy, reluctant and passive personalities. Such natives are usually in no hurry a tendency which in its
lowest aspect can make them lazy and prone to inaction in times where action is indispensable.
Much depends on the placement of Saturn in ascertaining how this nakshatra will function in a
particular nativity. The serpent of the depths is quite an immobile and inert creature, and it requires
some external agency or force to arouse it. This is why the presence of fiery optimistic planets like
Mars, Sun and Jupiter in this nakshatra help it overcome its latent ineftia. In fact, the placement of
any planet in this nakshatra makes it dynamic.
Uttarabhadrapada can initiate destructive or seemingly evil actions, but unlike its predecessor,
Purvabhadrapada, it usually does so for some wholesome reason. Uttarabhadrapada, even when
causing destruction, puts less emphasis on cruelty and depravity as compared to its predecessor.
uttarabhadrapada's anger is more sublimated and thus its actions are not mindless.
Reasonability is another key to this nakshatra. It likes to come out with the best possible
solutions, which are fair to all pafties. The interesting thing to note about this nakshatra is that it
usually has an eye for the needs of others, but almost always ends up benefitting from others.
Natives born under its strong influence usually benefit from gifu, donations and inheritance etc. One
interesting thing to note about this nakshatra is that it is usually foftunate with making and handling
money.
This nakshatra relates tp the Vana Prastha, thethird stage of life according to the ancient Vedic
texts, in which the native is supposed to cut off their worldly chords and retire to the forest in order
to seek enlightenment. It has secretive, reclusive tendencies, which may sometimes make the native
under the strong influence of this nakshatra prematurely reUre from their worldly duUes. No matter

[page 395]
426
what the evolutionary status an Uttarabhadrapada native has, there is always some seeking towards
some higher awareness'
In the universal scheme of things, uttarabhadrapada relates to "uarchodyamana shakti" - the
power to bring about rain. Its symbolism has raining clouds above, and growing plants below. This
imagery obviously has more to it than just being a common fertility reference. The rain here connects
with the soothing universal vibrations which can flow through our astral and causal bodies if we
open ourselves to them. This spiritual rain comes about from the celestial ocean of consciousness
when the hot Sun (representing our Atman) touches upon it. The reader can refer to the image of
uttarabhadrapada b understard the whole process better.
Mode of fututioning :
It is supposed to be a Balanced nakshatra. We have already seen that this nakshatra takes its
Ume before acting. When well disposed, it can give one the wisdom to put things in their proper
perspective. When afflicted, it can make one too @nseryative and too afraid to confront reality or
face tansformation.
Caste :
This nakshatra belongs to the Kshatriya or warrior caste. It is strange that a prudent nakshatra
like this should be assigned this caste. This comes about because of its association with the energies
of pluto and Shiva. Uttarabhadrapada is always a warrior, but not in any aggressive, cruel sense like
its predecessor purvabhadrapada. It works in the typical Kshatriya fashion of setting goals and
attaining them.
Qendcr :
It is a male nakshatra. The rulership of Jupiter gives this nakshatra its male quality. Also its
prsiding deities are both male.

[page 396]
427
tso{yparr d Hurwr (Ayurue[ir Constitutim) :
It mainly relates to the Sides of the Body, including the Sides of the Legs, the Shins and the
Soles of the Feet.
It is a primarily "Pilb" (fiery) nakshatra. This association comes from its symbol of a funeral
cot. As we discussed earlier, it is related to the earth's core, which as we know is the hottest paft of
our planet.
Directinn :
It covers the range from west to nofth.
lPadas (Qwrters) :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 30 20' - 6o 40' Pisces, falls in Leo Navamsa and is ruled
by Sun. It represents the active, illuminating, proud and achievement oriented side of this nakshatra.
Just like the rising or setting sun on the oceanic horizon (refer to the image), the function of this
pada is to spread around the light of its experience.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 60 40' - 10o 00' Pisces, falls in Virgo Navamsa ruled
by Mercury. This relates to the analytical, calculative and planning side of this nakshatra. It tends to
find wisdom in small things, and planeb here are more likely to stay irr the background then reveal
themselves.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 10o 00' - 13o 20' Pisces, falls in Libra Navamsa ruled
by Venus. This relates to the passive, balance seeking and equilibriurn-or:ented side of this nakshatra.
Planets placed here seek wisdom through balance and objectivity. Ther, :niqht however become too
passive and may lack the energy to let their findings be known.

[page 397]
428
The foufth pada or quarter of this asterism 13o 20' - 160 40' Pisces, falls in Scorpio Navamsa
ruled by Mars. This relates to the occult, mysterious and hidden aspect of this nakshatra' This pada
can go to extreme depths of confusion or depths of widom. Whichever way it operates, it always
has the ability to aggressively externalise its energy. Everything is intense here and things are
usualry likely to get to fwer pitch in relation to whatever area this pada is influencing (planet or
house).
lProfusiotu :
yoga and Meditation Experts; Counsellors &Therapists of alltypes; Shamen; Healers; Practitioners
of Tantra and other Occult Sciences; Divinators; Renunciates; Monks, Hermits; Those working in
Charity Organizations; Researchers; Philosophers; Poets, Writers, Musicians and Artists; Those working
in professions requiring extraordinary abilities, whether it be patience, insight erudition or awareness;
professions involving little movement like Shop Clerks, Night Watchmen, Doormen; Historians;
Librarians; Those who are unemployed and relying on inheritance, legacies or charity.
Pfu.es :
Libraries, Temples & Museums; Occult Bmk Stores; Ancient ruins; Historical Places; Cremation
Grounds; Holy Sites and Pilgrimage Places; Caves; Mountainous Caverns; Meditation Centres; All
places s;itable for meditation and quiet activities; Charity Organization Compounds; Forests, High
Mountain Ranges and other uninhabited solitary places; Bottoms of Lakes, Deep Seas & Oceansl
Social Welfare Centres; Centres for Psychic and Spiritual Research.
Quna ('Essence) an['Tattwa (Efzment) :
It is supposed to be a TamasrT nakshatra. Its basic inert quality and the hct that it deals with
dissolution on all levels of existence, made the ancient Vedic seers ascribe this guna to it. We have
seen earl6r that Shiva, the overlord of Tamo Guna, is the main presiding deity of this nakshatra.

[page 398]
429
The Ether element predominates for Uttarabhadrapada, as is the case with the last group of
nakshatras starting from Dhanishfa. Its relation to Ether is clear from its wisdom and all
encompassingness.
Qma EWe);
It is a Manusha (human) nakshatra. This goes to show that Uttarabhadrapada has a strong
involvement in human affairs, even though it relates to other finer realms of existence. It is one of
the nakshatras which form a bridge between tte astnl, causal and physial realms, bringing in
higher, universal truths into the material human frame of existence.
Orientation U Dispositi^on :
It is an Upward Looking nakshatra. This mainly relates to the expansive nafure of this asterism.
Activities begun under the influence of this nakshatra are more likely to grow and expand with time.
It is a Fixed nakshatra in keeping with the nature of its ruling deity Ahir Bhudanya. As mentioned
earlier, he is a very fixed sort of character, who literally and figuratively budges only when absolutely
necessary.
Lunar Montfr. ond Doy :
It can be seen as the ruler of the middle 9 days of the month known as Bhadnpada. This
usually falls in the solar calendar month of September.
Uttarabhadrapada is also related to Nauami (gth tithi or day) of the waxing and waning phases
of the Moon's monthly cycle.

[page 399]
430
Auspicbus .Actiaitizs :
Quiet peaceful activities; Research, Meditation, Psychic Development & Astral Exploration; Good
for making promises, pledges and commitments including Marriage; Beginning construction activities
- homes, offices etc; Financial dealings; Beginning activities requiring suppoft from others; Artistic
ventures; Treatment of diseases; Sexual activity; Entering a new home; Naming children, organizations
etc.; Planting & gardening.
Inauspicious Aniaities :
Unfavourable for travelling; Litigation; Dealing with enemies; Activities which require quick'
swift action in general; Speculation & gambling; Bad for lending money; Too much physical movernent
or exertion.
Pfanztarll &tfcr :
The planets associated with this nakshatra are Saturn, Jupiter, Neptune and Ketu. Saturn is the
main ruler of this asterism. In fact this nakshatra represents the culmination of Saturnine energy.
This is the place where Saturnine lessons learnt under the signs Capricorn and Aquarius, are
synthesized and transformed into true wisdom and enlightenment. Saturn's role here is not that of a
hard task master, but that of a wise, old teacher who teaches through patience, perseverance and
example. The most refined aspects of Saturn's functionings are expressed through this nakshatra. At
times this nakshatra can give abundant material prosperi$ as one reaps the fruits of hard work
done in previous lives. In more evolved souls however, this prosperity is bestowed as a result of
functioning in tune with the universal will. This is the nakshatra where Saturn becomes Shiva and
can no more be seen as an outcaste, slow, troublesome, painful deity of sorow.
Jupiter lends an expansive quality to this nakshatra. Uttarabhadrapada does not believe in
boundaries, and carries within itself all higher Jupiterian virtues like compassion, caring, sensitivity
and acceptance of the divine will. This nakshatra has a lot to do with the final balancing of the

[page 400]
431
energies of Jupiter and Saturn, the two planets regarded by some astrologers as being the most
important.
Neptune as we know is directly related to the celestial ocean, which houses the manifest
universe. Uttarabhadrapada as we have seen earlier, is directly related to this ocean through its
presiding deity Ahir bhudanya. Uttarabhadrapada is one of the few nakshatras which sets the stage
for the drama of life. In a way it can be seen as a director of the movie called lifu. This is the reason
why natives under the strong influence of this nakshatra often take up filmmaking in today's media
heavy society.
Ketu relates to the spiritual/detachment/enlightenment aspect of this asterism. On closer
inspection, one finds that Ketu has a strong connection to the way this nakshatra goes about achieving
its spirituaf goals. Uttarabhadrapada relates to Raja Yoga, which involves harnessing of the kundalini
shakti and opening of the seven sacralcentres. Ketu is the planet which relates directly to kundalini
shakti, and the seventh and final centre known as Sahastrara (please refer to the author's previous
work "The Rahu-Ketu experience" 9garPublications, India or "The Key Of Life" Lofus Press, I,JSA
for more insight on lGtu's role in this regard).
Active dynamic planets like Sun, Mars and Rahu do best in Uttarabhadrapada. Satum also does
well here if it is aspected by active planets like Mars and Jupiter. Jupiter, Mercury and Venus can also
do well in this nakshatra when associated with active planets.
Jupiter-Saturn conjunction and conjunctions of Ketu and Neptune with Jupiter and Saturn carry
an energy similar to this nakshatra. Saturn-Ketu conjunction however would relate more to
Purvabhadrapada.
'I/owefs and Afpfiabets :
The flrst pada (3o 20' - 60 40' Pisces) relates to "Du" as in the name "Durga".
The second pada (6o 40' to 10o (X)' Pisces) relates to "Tha" as in the name "Thatcter".

[page 401]
432
The third pada (10" 00'to 13"20' Pisces) relates to "Jha" as in the name "Jhanci".
The fourth pada (13020' to 160 40' Pisces) relates to "Na" as in the name "Natasha".
In the Sanskrit alphabet Uttarabhadrapada corresponds to the letters "Sha", "Sa" and "Ha", and
consequently its mantras are "Om Sham", "Om Sam" and "Om Ham"'
Seryat type an{ Compatihi"fity :
Ib sexual animal is a Cow, which indicates a docib and passive sexual nature. It is not a very
sexuaffy active nakshatra. It however can be quite interested in sex from a tantra point of view.
For sexual & marital compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the table on pages 457
& 458.
'Esoterb :
As a meeting point of the energies of Vishnu, the preseruer; and Shiva, the destroyer; this
nakshatra carries a very special influence. It relates to the harmonizing aspect of the universal mind,
which often times uses destruction as a means of preservation. Even Krishna, Vishnu's incarnation,
used destruction (Shiva's means) to set things right.
This nakshatra relates to the sahastrara or crown centre, the topmost amongst the seven
chakras. It is the final destination of the kundalini, the serpent force residing at the base of the
spine. Thus the whole symbolism of this nakshatra relates to the journey of the kundalini from the
base of the spine (which can be equated with the bottom of the sea), to the crown chakra (which
can be equated with the sudace of the celestial ocean).
The left (Ida), right (Pingla) and middle (Sushumna) channels converge and become one at
the third eye centre. These three channels can be equated with the trinity of Shiva, Brahma and
Vishnu respectively. Thus this nakshatra has a special affinity with the third eye chaka (Agneya)' It

[page 402]
433
is at the third eye centre where perfect equilibrium is established between nature's thre gunas.This
allows one to directly comprehend the functionings of the universal mind. This is the nakhatra
where wisdom is gained, and as a result all the mental, intellectual and emotional thirsts are quenched.
After the third eye chakra, there is only one channel, the centre one, leading up to the crown chakra,
which means that this nakshatra readies an individual for supreme enlightenment, putting them on
a singular path. .
The 'serpent of the depths' is often equated with 'a stream in the Milky Way'. This, besides
suggesting a path which leads us through the darkness of space, hints at the fact that the serpent
imagery is present on all levels of existence - it is the kundalini within our bodies, the sffeam in the
Milky Way within our galaxy, and Ahir Budhanya in the celestial ocean.
Uttarabhadrapada is the unfathomable darkness of space in which the material universe dwells.
It is the nothingness from which evefihing is born. It is where the answer to the most basic
questions eventually enocuntered by all thinkers, scientists, spiritualists and philosophers alike i.e.
"how did creation come out of nothingness and what existed when nothing existed", lies.
Q otra (Cetts tiat Linzage)
This nakshatra is related to the Sage Pulahu, one of the seven celestial sages looking after the
affairs of our galaxy. The name of this sage translates into "the connector of space". This makes
sense when we recall that Uttanbhadrapada presides over all the dark space which harbours creation.
fumedia[:
For thr:se suffering from bad effects resulting from afflictions to this nakshatra, the best remedial
measure is worship of Shiva, Durga or Vishnu. The practice of Raja yoga, which involves the raising
of the kundalini through the seven sacred centres is one of the best ways to utilise this nakshatra's
potential.

[page 403]
434
Repetition of the rOot mantras of this nakShatra - "Om Sham", "Om Sam" and "Om Ham", 108
times when Moon transits this nakshatra and in its corresponding lunar month' is sure to reduce
suffering and bring enlightenment into a person's life.
persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this nakshatra can also increase the
good effects through the above mentioned ways. It is helpful for them to wear shades of blue and
yellow. It is the nakshatra which encompasses everything classified under the term "psychedelic", so
imagery patterns and colours associated with "psychedelia" are good for conveying this nakshatra's
energy. One should use its directions, lunar month and the days when Moon transits Uttarabhadrapada
to undertake all impoftant actions.
Eapryfe :
Rabindmnath Tagore, the famous Indian writer and musician, has Uttarabhadrapada rising on
his Ascendant. His life, works and image bring out many of the qualities discussed earlier' His works
are full of compassion, humanity and sensitivity, qualities which form the cornerstone of this nakshatra.
He lacked the occult prowess which Uttarabhadrapada can bestow in the case of more evolved
souls. He however fits the bearded, old wise chief/advisor/teacher archetype commonly associated
with this nakshatra.
Mbce[lawow :
According to Varahamihira, Moon placed in Utbarabhadrapada denotes "a happy disposition.
Such naUves usually end up having lots of children and grandchildren. They are virtuous and make
convincing speakers. They are supposed to prevail over their enemies".
***

[page 404]
rf wu&*#
27. ftevati | 6"+c'fisc"s - ro"oot fi"c"s

[page 405]
27.
fuooti
. (16040' Pisces - 30000' Pisces)
In tfu Sky t
Revati, the culmination of Mercurial energy, in fact all zodiacal energies, is represented in the
celestial firmament by a group of very faint stars in the constellation of Pisces. The exact number of
these stars is not specified in the ancient texts, although 27 seems like an automatic choice! The
ancient vedic seers saw that these stars made a shape similar to a dhola (drum strung across the
neck with a strap and played with both hands, used for carrying in processions).
The brightest among these faint stars is known in modern astronomy as Zeta-Pixium, which
has a visual magnitude of only 5.20. It is located close to a comparatively brighter lEar, Mu-Piscium,
around the fag end of the tail of the fish formed by the constellation Pisces. This asterism is not easy
to locate in the night sky, but one can always utilize the fact that Zeta-Piscium lies almost exactly on
the planetary ecliptic (the path of the planets around the zodiac); in order to locate it in a very clear
new moon night sky.
Abme :
"Revati" has a simple translation - "wealthy". As we shall discover later, this name conveys alot
about this asterism on all levels, even though it is not apparent straightaway why the final asterism
representing complete dissolution be related to something as transitory as wealth. Its alternative
translaUon is "to transcend", which is more in keeping Wrlh tnis being the final nakstratra.

[page 406]
438
Sym6o[:
Since this asterism has a lot to do with duality, it has two and not one main symbol - a " fish
swimming in the sea" and a "drum". ' '*
A fish swimming in the water is an obvious choice as a symbol br this nakshatra, as it falls
completely in the sign of Pisces, which as we know is represented by two fishes swimming in
opposite directions. The symbolism of a fish swimming in the sea has been used from time immemorial
to show the soul's journey in the waters of the univer*,. Vishnu, the preseruer among the Trinity, is
often shown sitting atop the sea of consciousness.
The fish swimming in the sea also suggests a path. This nakshatra has a lot to do with paths of
all kinds, whether it is just a path to one's house or the whole life-path itself. As declared by all wise
men and incarnations, knowing and following one's path in life is the biggest penance of all. In a way
it is the one and only path to liberation.
This nakhatra, as we know, is the last among nakshatras and thus has a lot to do with moksha
and final enlightenment. It should be noted here that moksha doesn't actually mean liberation from
cycles of births and deaths, as is enunciated by many schools of thought. Even after final
enlightenment, one might have to take bifth in some cycle of some universe. To find one's true path
in life, one has to learn to see the bigger picture. This happens through connecting oneself with the
universal mind, which in turn is tuned to the collective consciousness. This nakhatra represents
collective consciousness. This however is a liftle different from the mass consciousness represented
by the sign Cancer.
A drum as we recall is the symbol for Dhanishb as well. There's a lot of similarity between
Revati and Dhanishta. One similarity which stands out immediately is that they are both regarded as
wealthy. Please refer to the symbol section in Dhanishta for understanding the signification of a
drum as a symbol. Revati's drum is similar to a Naggada (a type of Indian drum played with two
sticks), and other types of modern drums used by marching bands (refer to the image).

[page 407]
439
It can be seen that Revati's drums are always played by sticks of some kind instead of by hand.
They also have a connotation of bringing news, which the Dhanishta drum doesn't have. In all the
ancient cultures, any news of importance to the community was always announced accompanied by
the sound of drums. In some cultures, drum beats were even used as a way of sending signals in
much the same way as morse code. We can thus infer that'communication' is one of the key aspects
of this nakshatra.
Deity :
Pushan, a solar deity, similar to the Sun god, is considered the main presiding deity of this
asterism' He is supposed to light up all paths. This gives him rulership over as diverse a thing as
streetlights, which light up the road; a lighthouse, which keeps the ship from getting lost; to the
rulership of the inner light of the soul, which lights up one's life-path. He is always portrayed as
standing at the beginning of all paths and beginnings (refer to the image). This is the reason why he
became popular as the deity connected with safe travel. Consequently this nakshatra relates to all
kinds of travelling - physical, mental, emoUonal, astral or causal.
Pushan is supposed to be a more nourishing, softer deity than our Sun god and is said to give
wealth, prosperity and completion. It is not hard to see see how fruiffuljourneys or fruitful life-paths
will bring these to us automatically.
Finally Vishnu,the preserver among the Trinity, is the overseer of this nakshatra. At the time of
the final dissolution, it is Vishnu's job to gather together all of the universal life force and consciousness.
It is the gathering quality of this nakshatra which makes it wealthy, whether it be in terms of material
wealth, knowledge or experience. Vishnu as we know is the husband of taxmi, the goddess of
wealth and prosperity, which again brings this nakshatra in touch with the principle of abundance.
Mercury the planetary ruler of this nakshatra is supposed to be directly connected with Vishnu.
communication is a forte of Mercury and Vishnu and as we have seen earlie[ of this nakshatra as
well' The image of Vishnu and Laxmi sitting on a snake bed on top of the ocean of celestial waters
b an image whirh can very muclr $Jm up this nakshatra. .,'...

[page 408]
440
Afoture (t functioning :
Common English words like "reverie"r "reverent", "revolving", "reverend", "revelry", "represent",
,,resolution,, - seem to have the same root as the word "Revati". We can easily see that their meanings
relate to Revati's functioning at some level or other'
Revati is one of the most pleasing and benevolent of nakshatras. It is an extremely foftunate
nakhatra and this helps it see life in a positive light. It is the eternal optimist and remains completely
unflustered even in the lace of big setbacks. It has an innate trust in divine providence. It knows
how to keep the faith but in some cases it has a tendency to not do anything else except having
faith. In such cases this usually positive quality turns out to its detriment.
Alot of the natives born under this nakshatra tend to rely too much on belief and their beliets
are not always real. It is seen that some Saturn influence is required to give a realistic groundedness
to this nakshatra. Let us take two cases. In one nativity, Jupiter is placed in this nakshatra aspected
by Satum and in the other, Jupiter is placed in this nakshatra without having an aspect of Saturn.
The former is more likely to reap all the expansive benefits of this nakshatra, while the latter will be
more prone to idle fantasies'
This is the nakshatra of the dreamer. It can create whole worlds around itself. This is because
of its strong association with Mala,the illusory quality related with Vishnu, which sustains the drama
of life. Alot of natives with prominent Revati tend to live in universes of their own creation. It is a
case of Maya within Maya, which is not very conducive for enlightenment. The best thing Revati
natives can do is to see things as they are.
Revati people are always supportive of others and since one reaps what one sows they often
get suppofted as well. The peculiar thing about Revati natives is that they always get support when
they need it most.
Revati can be seen as the apex of civilization. Its natives place special emphasis on refinement,
sophistocation, grooming and civilized behaviour. They like all the things which constitute civilization,
and abhor primitive behaviour. A lot of Revati nAtives are born into rich, aristocratic or refined

[page 409]
/u1
families. Unless there are other conflicting factors in the chart, Revati promotes good childhood,
upbringing, early education and physical felicity.
Revati natives seem to have pleasing social personalities and are usually well liked within their
social sphere. This is to be expected from someone who has had a good upbringing. No other
nakshatra comes close to Revati as far as being a socialite is concerned. They are very good hosts
and their friendships last long because of their responsible nature. They are very understanding of
other's problems and like to be as helpful to as many people as they can. However, sometimes they
take too many people's problems on their shoulders, and can exhaust themselves mentally, emotionally
or physically as a result. :
They are always soft and polite in conversation and only spiteful if hurt or jealous. Revati is one
of the most tender nakshatras and so has a tendency to get huft very easily. Despite this they are
often good counsellors and have a knack for solving people's problems or showing them their right
path.
Revati natives usually have a lustrous and luscious body and a smiley, lighthearted demeanour.
One can refer to the picture of Pushan in the nakshatra image, or look up an image of Mshnu, for
getting a general idea of the appearance of Revati natives. Revati is a soft but indulgent asterism. It
is the nakshatra which derives the npst fun and joy out of the drama of life. It must be said that
while more evolved souls learn to keep themselves on an observer status, the younger, less evolved
souls tend to immerse themselves completely in the maya of life.
This nakshatra doesn't actually have a sense of limits and so it is very easy for it to do too much
of anything' This nakshatra likes to exude power through its speech and other forms of communication.
It is the most charming and enchanting amongst all the nakhatras and its charm lies in completely
engaging another person's attention. This engagement can at times be so extreme that the other
person may feel that nothing but the two of them exists. It is also a master at appearing intensely
engaged in things, even though its attention might be scattered in a million directions. Among the
nakhatras, Revati has the strongest ability to cast illusions, while at the same Ume in its lower
aspect it can just as easily get caught up in illusions itself.

[page 410]
lu2
Revati is the most tricky and clever amongst the nakshatras. It is a chameleon which can put on
any act at any given point in time. The more evolved souls use this ability for seruing universal
causes, while the less evolved souls end up using it for selfish motives.
Reva6 nagves are proverbial "Richy Riclt" characters. People often take them to be very financially
well off even when they are penniless.
To sum it up, Revati can be seen as the height of civilization with all its upsides and downsides.
If there is one asterism which can see the bigger picture, then this is it. Since it is the last
nakshatra, it has the ability to understand and even mimic the energies of every other nakshatra'
Revati is a complete display of all possibilities of existence. It is the only complete nakshatra in the
sense that it contains all the wisdom and knowledge there is. There's nothing which is beyond the
scope of Revati's domain and thus it is very difficult to label it, stereotype it, or put its nature and
.activiues in a box. It always surprises ottrers by turning into something completely different just as
it is being put into a category.
It is a nakshatra dealing with infinity of time, space and evefihing else. This is the reason why
it is hard to pin this nakshatra down, as some new light is always shining on the horizon'
The most significant thing about Revau is that it has the ability to see and understand every
other nakshatra. Its most important keyword is "summation". It is the sigma andtlre omqa. O|dlter
nakshatras can only fathom where they are at, but Revati can fathom where everyone is at. Obviously
this all seeing capacity is restricted by the evolutionary state of the soul in question' The more
evolved the soul, the more all encompassing the vision'
In the universal scheme of things, Revati relates to "khiradyapani shakti" - the power to
nourish through milk. Its symbolism has cows above, and calves below. This imagery emphasises
the nourishing and sustaining aspect of Revati. However, if one pays attention to the fact that
Vishnu, the sustainer amongst the holy trinity, sits atop the celestial ocean known as kshiraagaq a
whole new interpretation opens up. Revati then relates to the shaki which sustains the celestial
ocean in which all the fourteen lolcas play the game of lifa

[page 411]
zt43
Modp of funrtUnlng :
Revati is considered to be a Balanced nakshatra, This relates to its love of society and its
conservative and balarrced approach to fostering civilization. It also relates to its wisdom aspect,
which after seeing all sides of a situation, takes the middle path. Finally all philosophkal and religious
schools of thought consider the middle way to be the best way. It is this nakshatra's task to
accommodate and resolve the duality inherent in existence.
Caste :
It belongs to the Shudra caste. This is the case because ancient seers saw it as a service
orientated nakshatra. As mentioned earlier, Revati natives are always willing to give assistance to
others. In fact this is one of the few nakshatras which doesn't mind helping out even their enemy. In
a way, Vishnu is also doing seruice to the universe by maintaining harmony and keeping the game of
life alive.
Qendcr :
It is a Female nakshatra. It represents the sum total of all the feminine force which sustains the
universe.
Bodyportt d l{unor (Aguledir. Corrctitutbn) :
Feet, Ankles, AMomen and Groin are the body parts related to this nakshatra. Its association
with the feet and ankles is clear from its relationship with Pisces. In our view it must relate to the
aMomen because of the positioning of the manipura (navel) chakra. Vishnu is the presiding deity of
this chakra. We are not very clear about the reason why some scholars associate groins with this
nakshatra.

[page 412]
444
It is a primarily "Kapha" (watery) nakshatra. This is clear from the fact that it falls completely,
in a water sign and is associated with watery planets like Jupiter and Neptune.
Direction :
It is related primarily to north and north-east.
eo{ns (Qwrters) :
The first pada or quarter of this asterism 160 40' - 20o 00' Pisces, falls in Sagittarius Navamsa
and is ruled by Jupiter. This relates to the happy go lucky, optimistic and philanthropic side of this
nakshatra. This pada has a tendency to get carried away and so it is important for these natives to
choose the right thing to get carried away with. They are the kind who will go about fanatically
espousing their cause or belief.
The second pada or quafter of this asterism 20" 00' - 23" 20' Pisces, falls in Capricorn Navamsa
ruled by Saturn. This conveys the more practical and organizational aspect of Revati. This is the
pada which relates to all time-related sciences like Astrology etc. Natural benefics maintain a sense
of balance here, while natural malefics can give too much ambition. This is the most realistic pada
within this nakshatn ard has a tendency to not be swayed by blind belief.
The third pada or quafter of this asterism 23" 2O' - 26" 40' Pisces, falls in Aquarius Navamsa
ruled by Saturn. This relates to the bohemian and humanitarian asped of Revati. This pada finds it
difficult to express its workings on a material plane.
The fourth pada or quafter of this asterism 260 40' - 30o 00' Pisces, falls in Pisces Navamsa
ruled by Jupiter. This is the eternal dreamer. It can only give good material results if natural malefics
like Mars and Satum occupy it. Like the first pada, this pada has a tendency to get swayed easily.

[page 413]
/t/$
lPro{usions :
Hypnotists & Psychic Mediums; Creative Artists of all kinds including Painters, Musicians etc. ;
Actors, Entertniners & Comedians; Linguists; Conjurors, Illusionists, Magicians; Watchmakers; Road
Planners and those working in Rail & Road Construction Business; Time Keepers; Calendar/Ephemeris
Makers; Astrologers; Divinators; Managers; Professional Hosts & Hostesses (especially air hostesses,
ship stewards etc. ); Gemstone Dealers; Those involved in the Pearl Industry; All kinds of Shipping
and Marine Industry; Those involved with Foster Homes & Orphanages; Driving or Transport
Professions; Those involved with Religious Institutions; Air Traffic Controllers, Traffic Cops; Light
House Workers; Those involved with Road Safety; Driving Instructors.
lP[aces :
Roads, Railroad rracks, Airports; oceans, seas, Beaches; shipping yards; stage; cinema;
Orphanages; Monasteries; Ships, Aeroplanes, Trains, Cars etc; Bus Stations, Transpolt Industry;
Public Auditoriums; Clock Towers/Watch Towers; Light Houses; Driving Instruction Schools; All places
connected with the above mentioned professions.
9u* ('Essence) an"[ Tattwa (Ebment) :
It is supposed to be a gttwic nakshatra. This comes as no surprise as this nakshatra has
primariV sattwic ruling deities and is associated with benefic satMic planets like Jupiter, Mercury
and Neptune.
It belongs to the Ether element. This again comes as no surprise as the Ether element has an
all encompassing quality, and can mingle and cooperate with all the other elements, which is what
the essence of RevaUb functioning is.

[page 414]
zu6
Qana EWd
It is considercd a Detta or godly nakhatra. This fact is quite apparent from iB general benefic
nature and the benefic quality of ib ruling planets and deities.
Oricntation ond Disposition :
It is a Level nakshatra. This relates to the balanced nature of this asterism. We have already
discussed how it is a soft nakshatra, which automatically means that it doesn't go to extremes, The
Level aspect also relates to its innate capacity to maintain a regular equilibrilized flow of life force on
all planes of existence.
As mentioned previously it is a Soft nakshatra. This basically relates to its mild, tender, easy
going and pleasure loving nature
Lurwr Montfi. & Dag :
It relates to the last 9 days of the lunar month of Bhadra Pada, which usually falls in September.
Revati is also related to Purnima (15u1 tithi or day) of the waxing phase of the Moon's monthly
cycle.
Auspiciaus Altiaities i :!ei
Initiating all activities of a positive nature; Business activities and financial dealings; Anything
involving exchange of goods; Good for marriage & sexual activity; Religious rituals; All kinds of
travelling; Good for dealing with gemstones (putting them on for the first tinp etc.); Buying cars,
homes and other valuable goods; Creative activities like music, drama etc.; Good for kind, charitable
and soft activities; Learning, especially spiritual or occult; Healing and treatment of diseases; Rest
and relaxation; Good for leisure activities like gardening; Good for completion of all types (putting
the final touclrcs m things).

[page 415]
447
Inawpirious Actiaitits :
*The last two quarters of this nakshatra should be avoided for beginnings of all kinds.
All activities requiring harshness and boldness should be avoided. Not good for overcoming
difficulties, obstructions, enmity or calamities; Not good for negative, sharp actions like surgery; Not
good for strenuous activities of any kind like mountain climbing.
tPfnnztary Xykr
Mercury is the primary ruler of this nakshatra along with its sign rulers Jupiter, Neptune and
Ketu. As mentioned earlier, Revati represents the culmination point of Mercurial energy. Since it is
the last amongst the nakshatras, it can be seen as the culmination point of all zodiacal energies.
Mercury's function here is not so much analytical as it is discriminatory. Mercury's function here is to
categorize, classifi and give everything its own unique place in the scheme of creation. Mercury
doesn't lose its sense of humour here despite the fact that its task here is enormous. Mercury has to
evolve and become a Buddha (enlightened one) here. It is interesting to note that Buddha is the
sanskrit name originally assigned to Mercury by the ancient Vedic seers. They had set and encoded
its goal in its name itself! Mercury has to become Vishnu, the maintainer of universal affairs, who,
while being in the game is still out of the game.
Mercury however cannot achieve this feat without the help of Jupiter, the harbinger of wisdom
and compassion. It is Jupiter which gives an understanding of the basic laws of nature, as Mercury
gives no cognizance to rules - universal or otherwise. The blending together of the energies of
Jupiter and Mercury creates the Neptunian field. One ancient school of astrological thought sap
that the three ouQr planets act as secondary Suns and in turn control two of the inner planets.\
According to this school of thought, Neptune presides over the functioning of Jupiter and Mercury.
One can easily see that this line of thought is validated through Vedic Mythology and Astrology,
Vishnu is in essence a Neptunian deity and most of the schools of Jyotish relate the planets Jupiter
and Mercury with Vishnu.

[page 416]
448
Together Neptune, Jupiter and Mercury rule over the intellectual realm and share the responsibility
of connecting our individual consciousness with the collective universal consciousness.
Ketu is the planet of the beginning and the end. Since Revati represents the end, Ketu's
relationship with this nakshatra is not very hard to establish. Ketu is the planet most intimately
connected with dissolution of our pasl krmas and it achieves that using the energy of Revati.
Jupiter, Mercury Venus and Moon usually do well in Revati. Ketu's placement here is good for
spiritual pursuits. Conjunctions like lupiter/Mercury; Jupiter/Mercury/Ketu; Jupiter/Neptune; Jupiter/
Ketu; Mercury/Ketu; Mercury/Neptune; Ketu/Neptune; mirror this asterism's energy.
'/owe{s and AIpfrabe* :
The first pada or quarter of this asterisrn 160 40' -20" (X)' Pisces coresponds to 'The" as in The.
The second pada or quarter of this asterism 20" 00' - 23" 20'Pisces corresponds to "Tho" as in
Though.
The third pada or quarter of this asterism 23o 20' - 26" 40' Pisces corresponds to "Cha" as in
Charlie.
The fourth pada or quarter of this asterism 26o 40' - 30" 00' Pisces corresponds to "Chi" as in
Chile. .:r{'
In the SanSkit alphabet ReVati COrfeSpOndS tO "La", "KSha", "A" and "Aa", ConseqUently itS
mantras are "Om Lam", "Om lGham", "Om Am" and "Om Aam".
Sean"t'Iype an{ Compatihility :
Its sexual animal is an Elephant. In fact many of these nakshatras'qualities can be gauged from
the essential nature and behaviour of elephants. The fact that elephants prefer level grounds rather
than uneven terrain, once again reiterates the level aspect of this nakhatra. Elephants are the

[page 417]
449
largest among all land animals. In the oceans their counterparts, the blue whales, will also fall under
the auspices of Revati. One can do a study of the sexual nature of these creatures to understand the
sexr.lal nature of this nakshatra.
For sexual & marital compatibility with other nakshatras please refer to the tables on pages 457
& 458.
Esoterir :
Revati corresponds to the universal point in time where the material as well as astral are drawn
into the causal realm and after the process is completed, the causal is drawn into the supreme
eternal void. On a more personal level, Revati relates to the assimilation of life experiences from
many previous lives, so that a synthesis can take place and a state of completeness achieved.
Revati can thus be associated with the seventh sacral centre known as Sahastrara. A state of
complete awareness is achieved after the kundalini opens every petal of this thousand petalled lotus
centre. After achieving this, the kundalini breaks through the top paft of the head known as Brahma
Randha. At this point the will of the soul achieves complete harmony witr ttre universal will, and the
personal consciousness is submerged into the collective universal consciousness. In other words,
the drop joins with the ocean and can no longer be traced as an individual drop. In its highest
aspect, Reyati rglates !9.thig.state and process.
In a relatively lower aspect, Revati relates to the'ocean of illusion'associated with the third
sacraf centre often known as Manipura Chakra (or the navel centre). This is the place where the chi
(life force) is supposed to reside as per Zen principles. This centre is representative of all the activities
on a worldly/material plane. Only after the mastery of this oceanic field does a soul gain true
knowledge about the higher planes of existence. Once again the image of Vishnu sifting atop the
ocean of illusion best characterizes this aspect of Revati.

[page 418]
450
Revati represents the celestial ocean in which the creative force rests, after Mahapnlaya(universal
dissolution). On a smaller scale, cycles of destruction and dissolution take place on our planet as
weff. In each such Pralaya,where the oceans are engulfing all the land, Vishnu is supposed to
incarnate as a fish and save seven sages and all the plants and animals required for the recontinuation
of life. This can be said to be a very Revati operation. In fact the process of eafthly death also
requires Revati's services, as all the actions of this life and all the vital pranas (life forces) are
accumulated within the astral/causal center before the dprd between the material body and the
astral body is cut.
Finally, Revati conceals the answer to the ultimate question - "Why all of this creation, for what
purpose, and for whom ?"
Qotra (Cettstiat Lineage) :
This nakshatra is related to the Sage Kratu, one of the seven celestial sages looking after the
affairs of our galaxy. The name of this sage translates into "the inspirer",which is in harmony with
the fact that Revati is one of the most optimistic and inspirational nakshatras'
fumedi"a[ :
For those suffering from bad effects resulting from afflictions b this nakshatra, the best remedial
measure is worship of Vishnu.
Repetition of the root mantras of this nakshatra - "Om Lam", "Om Ksham", "Om Am" and "Om
Aam' 108 times when Moon transits this nakshatra and in its corresponding lunar month is sure to
reduce suffering and bring enlightenment into a person's life'
Persons who are benefiting from the positive energy of this nakshatra can also increase the
good effects through the above mentioned ways. It is helpful for them to wear all oceanic, light,
variegated colours and pastel shades, They should use its directions, lunar month and the days
when Moon transits Revati to undertake all important actions.

[page 419]
451
E4amp[z :
Dolly Pafton, the well-known singer/enteftainer has Revati rising on her Ascendant. Her expansive
body and appearance combined with soft, friendly features characterise the benevolent and expansive
nature of this nakshatra. Her life is a good example of Revati's capacity to give easy money, comforts,
luxury fame, and an upbringing in benevolent zurroundings.
Misceffnneous:
According to Varahamihira, Moon in Revati "gives one pefect body and physical felicity. The
native is supposed to be blessed with purity, luck, wealth and a heroic disposition." One will generally
find that those having Moon or Ascendant in Revati are usually gentle, kind and pious unless there
are other overwhelming factors to the contrary in the chart.
Rabindranath Tagore, the famous Indian writer, musician and thinker was born with his Moon
placed in Revati and all of varahamihira's precepts apply to his life and personality.
:l*:f

[page 420]
A6frijit
Abhijit is a nakshtara which comes into picture when a 28 Nakshaha system is used. This
system was discarded by the Vedic seers for a variety of reasons. Firstly, the division of 360 degree
zodiacal arc by 28 gives an incomplete fraction. This makes it impossible to specifo the exact degreecal
range of each nakshaba, which makes an unequal size system the only possibility. Even if one
unwantingly accepts that each naksahtra would have a different size, one is faced with the strange
task of dividing 28 Nakshatras among 9 planets. Even if one manages to get over this obstacle by
assigning 4 nakshataras to one planet and 3 to the rest, one finds that the exceedingly accurate
Dasha syttem hlls to pieces. In other words, it makes perfect sense to use a 27 nakshatra system.
All this has a lot to do with the fact that 27 is a more perfect number than 28, but a discussion on
that is beyond the scope of this work. The average time it takes Moon to complete one revolution
through the zodiac is 27.32t7 days, a figure which is closer to 27 than it is to 28. Thus a 27
nakshatra system also fits in with the Lunar calender much better than a 28 nakshaba system. It is
interesting to note that the Chinese and Arabic astrologers are still using this borrowed 28 lunar
mansion system, which has nD sense besides the fact that it fits in with the seven day-four week
sofarcafender (7 x4 =28).
Abhfiit can be seen as an attempt to highlight the speciality of a ceftain portion of the zodiac.
This certain portion lies between 0 and 12 degrees of the sign Capricorn, which would place Abhijit
between Utbarashada & Shravana. The English translations of the term "AbhUit' can range from "the
undefeatable", "ever-conquering", "complete victory" & "final victory", but they all point iowards the
same general area of triumph and achievement. No wonder then that Krishna says in Bhagawadgita,
"Amongst the nakshatras I am Abhrjit". It is in this part of the celestial firmament that Indra and the
Cods achieved a final & lasting victory over the Demons.

[page 421]
454
One finds that the triumphant aspect of Abhijit is very similar to that of Uttarashada. Also
Abhijit more or less lies within the last l0 degrees of Uttarashada. Uttarashada is the nakshatra
where a conclusive triumph of good over evil takes place. Abhijit then can just be seen as a specific
part in Uttarashadha where there is absolute domination of all that is good from the universal
perspective.

[page 422]
E6offi?h Cfrarts
Asfiwini
Chaft1 : Bruqe Lee
27 Nov L940, 2.45 pm, Seattle
As 09:32:15
Su 12:31:53
Mo 23:02:19
Ma 1l:43:52
Me 22:31:33
Ju 14:28:20
Ve 0B:42:59
Sa 16:25:56
Ra 14:56:37
Ke 14:56:37
Ur 00:37:53
Ne 04:22:28
Pl 11: 11:36
Ari Ashwini Cho
Sco Anuradha Noo
Lib Vishakha Tee
Ub Swati Ray
Lib Vishakha Tee
Ari Bharani Lee
Lib Swati Roo
Ari Bharani Lee
Vir Hasta Shah
Pis U. Bhadra. Jya
Tau Krittika Ec
Vir U. Phalg. Pah
Can Pushya Hoh
Bruce Lee was known for his agility, speed, aleftness and pioneering activities in the martial arts.
Most astrologers fail to recognize that only Aswini (the fastest of nakshatras) rising on his ascendant
could set him on a life path where he received recognition for these particular qualities.
As JuR
SaR
I
'7-
Ve Ma
Me Mo
Ke As JuF
SaR Ur
PI
Su Ve Ma
Me Mc Ne Ra

[page 423]
456
tsfinrani
Chart 2 :
21 Feb L972, I.20 am, BombaY, India
As 11:14:18
Su 07:48:57
Mo 26:04:34
Ma L3:17:26
Me 10:44:52 o79o/o
Ju 09:00:56
Ve 18:50:38
Sa 06:29:50
Ra 10:27:57
Ke 10:27:57
Ur 24:29:02
Ne 11:43:02
Pl 07:59:48
Sco Anuradha
Aqu Satabhi.
Ari Bhatani
Ari Ashwini
Aqu Satabhi.
Sag Moola
Pis Revati
Tau Krittika
Cap Shravana
Can Pushya
Vir Chitra
Sco Anuradha
Vir U. Phalg.
Noo
Goh
Loh
- Lah -, .,.*,--;.
Sah
Bha
Day
Oo
loo
Hoh
Pay
Noo
Pee
This native has had sudden extreme fluctuations in his foftunes rising from poverty to millionaire
status to bankuptcy in a very short space of time . His Ascendant lord Mars is conjunct the th lord
Moon (luck & fortune) in the extreme nakshatra of Bharani in the 6h house (winning and losing).
Ve Ma Mo Sa
Su Me Ke
Ra
JU As Ne Ur Pl
t; . -..t i 1.): J-.

[page 424]
457
WttiLa
Chart 3 :
6 January 2004, 2.50 pm, London
As 24:39:26
Su 06:15:50
Mo 24:4t:37
Ma 14:39:08
Me II:22:4t
lu t5:22:23
Ve 02:03:00
Sa 16:54:58
Ra 16:19:47
Ke 16:19:47
Ur 12:42:22
Ne 21:28:32
Pl 27:32:41
Sco Jyeshtha
Tau Krittika
Tau Mrigashi
Gem Ardra
Ari Ashwini
Leo P. Phalg.
Gem Mrigashi
Gem Ardra
Ari Bharani
Lib Swati
Aqu Satabhi.
Cap Shravana
Sco Jyeshtha
Yee ,. ". jj.:
Oo t. .4
Vay :
Nga
Lah
Moh
Kah
Cha
Lee
Roh
Sah
Guh
Yoo
This child has his fourth lord from the Moon, Sun, placed in the maternal nakshatra of Krittika. From
birth he has had been surrounded by maternal energy of 3 people and is about to add another 4 to
the list to complete the seven mother aspect of the seven sisters constellation. It is interesting to
note how the child has a Mars ascendant rising , brings the legend of the mars-deity karttikeya being
raised by the seven krittika sisters to life.
Me RaSu Mo VeR
Ma Sa
Ur
Ne Ju
As Pl Ke

[page 425]
458
fufrini
Chart4:BobDYlan
24May 1941, 11.05 am, Duluth, Minnesota
As 06:58:45
Su 09:50:03
Mo 20:33:58
Ma 12:29:53
Me 28:54:28
lu 06:28:26
Ye L9:07:42
Sa 26:57:27
Ra 05:32:15
Ke 05:32:15
Ur 03:33:10
Ne 01:54:42
Pl 09:19:21
Leo Magha Moo
Tau Krittika AY
Ari Bharani LaY
Aqu Satabhi. Sah
Tau Mrigashi Vo
Tau Krittika Oo
Tau Rohini Vee
Ari Krittika Ah
Vir U. Phalg. Pah
Pis U. Bhadra. Doo
Tau Krittika Oo
Vir U. Phalg. Toh
Can PushYa HaY
This singer songwriter achieved legendary status in the field of singing/song writing' His 10h house
is full with his Ascendant lord/natural karaka for career sun and creative planet Venus placed in
Rohini ( representing beauty of material creation) and riches'
As
Me
Ur Ju Su Ve11
Ma
Ke Sa
Mo
Me
Ur Ju
SrrVp
Ma PI
As
Ne Ra

[page 426]
459
Mrigkftira
Chaft 5 :
23 October L967,7.35am, Southpo( Australb
As tB:24 14
Su 05:23:10
Mo 24:00:20
Ma 06:27:11
Me 23:44:48
Ju 07:09:07
Ve 20:06:35
Sa 14:05:51
Ra 04:18:07
Ke 04:18:07
Ur 03:30:32
Ne 29:45:08
Pl 28:22:55
Sco Jyeshtha Noh
Lib Chitra Ree
Tau Mrigashi Vay
Sag Moola yoh
Lib Vishakha Too
Leo Magha Moo
Leo P. Phalg. Tee
Pis U. Bhadra Jya
Ari Ashwini Chay
Lib Chitra Ree
Vir U. Phalg. pah
Lib Vishakha Tay
Leo U. Phalg. Tay
The presence of the ninth lord Moon in the nakshatra of Mrigshira suggests a searching disposition
in relation to religious/spiritual issues. The native despite being born in the west found vedic
learning and vegetarianism at a young age. Moon's exaltation helps in finding an exalted way.
Because of the 7b house involvement, the natives paftner also helped in getting her deeper into the
As
8
SaR Ra Mo
PI
Ju Ve
Ma As Ke SuMeR
Ne
Ur
Vedic realm.

[page 427]
460
Ardra
Chart6:NikolaiTesla
9 July 1856, 10.50 Pm, Croatia
As 15:42:44
Su 25:52:37
Mo 21:06:14
Ma 27:03:11
Me 06:12:48
lu l6:44:0L
Ye 22:52:26
Sa 13:41:50
Ra 28:13:09
Ke 28:13:09
Ur 02:04:58
Ne 28:30:51
Pl 13:41:31
Aqu Satabhi. See
Gem Punarvasu . Koh
Vir Hasta Tuh
Vir Chitra Poh
Gem Mrigashi Kee
Pis Revati DaY
Gem Punarvasu KaY
Gem Ardra Nga
Pis Revati Chee \
Vir Chitra Poh
Tau Krittika Ee
Aqu P. Bhadra. Dah
Ari Bharani Lee
The brilliant scientist Nikolai Tesla is credited for the invention of the radio, free energy and the
alternate current conductor coil. The eccentric and inventive sign of Aquarius rises on his Ascendant
with his Ascendant lord Saturn placed in intellectual Ardra in the 5h house (creativity & intellect)'
He c|aimed that he cou|d destroy bui|dings and sp|it the earth,s core with a high vibrationa| device,
a very Ardra concept. Ardra's intellectual and electrical ability finds full expression in his chaft'
As Ne
- 11 -
Ju Ra PI Ur Me Sa
Ve Su
As Ne
Vo Ma
Ke

[page 428]
461
Purnaoasu
Chart 7 i
18 July 1950, 8.10am, Marehra, India
As 01:53:33
Su 14:06:49
Mo 19:40:56
Ma 03:11:49
Me 01:16:01
Ju 2t:04:36
Ve 21:34:19
Sa 01:46:01
Ra 09:39:59
Ke 09:39:59
Ur 23:46:15
Ne 14:12:08
Pl 18:40:19
Lib Chitra Rah
Lib Swati Roh
Leo P. Phalg. Tah
Can Punarvasu Hee
Sco Vishakha Toh
Vir Hasta Tuh
Vir Hasta Tuh
Can Punarvasu Hee
Gem Ardra Koo
Sag Moola Bha
Tau Mrigashi Vay
Vir Hasta Shah
Can Ashlesha Dee
G!'
'''fi -r.:
l'!i
The native has Saturn and Mars placed in Punarvasu in the 10b house ( House of Profession). The
native was employed in the Indian Air Force for over 30 years and a major part of it was to do with
Air Traffic Controls. This highlights the safety aspect of Punarvasu along with its associaUon with air
and flight.
Ur Ra
PI
Sa Ma
Mo
Ke Me As SuNe Ju
Ve

[page 429]
462
Qushya
Chaft 8 :
30 January L967, t2 am, New York
As 08:33:34
Su 16:42:55
Mo 09:45:20
Ma 23:45:53
Me 14:48:29 R
Ju 12:28:55 R
Ve 03:38:58
Sa 26:41:00
Ra 09:38:30
Ke 09:38:30
Ur 10:21:46
Ne 05:02:15
Pf OL:23:07
Lib Swati Roo
Cap Shravana Joh
Gem Ardra Koo
Lib Vishakha Too
Cap Shravana Jay
Vir Hasta Poo
Pis U. Bhadra. Doo
Pis Revati Chee
Pis U. Bhadra. Tu
Vir U. Phalg. Pee
Vir Hasta Poo
Sco Anuradha Nah
Vir U. Phalg. Toh
Yi:
Since native's Jupiter dasa began she has been having increasing prosperity in her profession as a
medical lawyer Jupiter ( planet of law)is exalted in the 10n house in the helpful, righteous and
institutional constellation of Pushya.
Ma
As Ke
,7,
MeR Su 10
Sa Ra
Ve JuR
MeR
Su PI
Ne Ma
As Ke Mo Ur

[page 430]
463
Asfufia
Chart 9 :
27 May L9L7,7.37am, London, England
As 02:41:14
Su 12:43:20
Mo 24:36:01
Ma 23:53:12
Me 28:03:25 R
Ju 29:45:08
Ve 20:56:47
Sa 04:12:27
Ra 19:54;35
Ke 19:54:35
Ur 01:00:34
Ne 09:54:18
Pl 10:30:18
Can Punarvasu Hee .i:,
Tau Rohini Oh
Can Ashlesha Day
Ari Bharani Loh
Ari Krittika Ah
Ari Krittika Ah ':
Tau Rohini Voo ;*:
Can Pushya Hoo t
Sag P. Shad. Dah
Gem Ardra Cha
Aqu Dhanish. Goo
Can Pushya Hay
Gem Ardra Gha
The above native (female) has her Ascendant lord Moon placed in Aslesha, which puts both her self
and mind under the influence of the energies of this nakshatra. The native chose the medical line as
profession, something which many Aslesha natives take up. She remained a bachelor her whole life
in order to avoid sharing of resources. She was always stocking up for the fear of war or any such
calamity. After fifty years of tireless work, she had amassed a huge fortune but still always lived like
a pauper. Most of Aslesha's mass significations in the modern world are shown through her character.
She still ended up as a benign, harmless type as the real nasty side of Ashlesha was kept in check
by the presence of Saturn in Pushya, next to the Moon.
iJu
. Ma MeR
Ju Ma
MeR VeSu Pl Ke
Ur Sa As
Ne Mo
Ra

[page 431]
464
Mogfto
Chart 10 : Rajiv Gandhi
20 August 19114, 9.08 am, Mumbai, India
As 21:25:35
Su 03:50:38
Mo 17:23:37
Ma 01:12:43
Me 28:34:48
Ju 12:12:29
Ve 18:40:55
Sa 14:13:18
Ra 02:49:05
Ke 02:49:05
Ur 19:41:18
Ne 09:33:45
Pl 15:49:10
Leo P. Phalg. Tee
Leo Magha Mee
Leo P. Phalg. Tah
Vir U. Phalg. Toh
Leo U, Phalg. TaY
Leo Magha May
Leo P. Phalg. Tah
Gem Ardra Nga
Can Punarvasu Hee
Cap U. Shad. Boh
Tau Rohini Vee
Vir U. Phalg. Pee
Can Pushya Dah
The Sun is the ruling planet in the chaft, being the main dispositor. Magha can be clearly seen in the
native's life through his inheritance of the primeministership of India from his mother Indira Gandhi
and his grandfather Nehru. Following the family tradition he also inherited an unfortunate demise,
having been blown up by a suicide bomber.
Su Ju Mo Ve
As Me
Ur Sa
Ra PI
Ke
Su Ju
Mo Ve
Ac lvlp
Ma Ne

[page 432]
465
Quraapftafguni
Chaft 11 :
6 May 1970, 4.55am, Munich, Germany
As 22:21:35
Su 21:46:19
Mo 28:34:58
Ma 18:24:25
Me 26:42:47 R
Ju 05:50:12 R
Ve 16:40:28
Sa 19:05:29
Ra 15:12:49
Ke 15:12:49
Ur LL:47:34
Ne 06:28:34
Pl 0L:27:58
Ari Bharani Lay
Ari Bharani Lay
Ari Krittika Ah
Tau Rohini Vee
Ari Krittika Ah
Lib Chitra Ree
Tau Rohini Vee
Ari Bharani Loo
Aqu Satabhi. See
Leo P. Phalg. Moh
Vir Hasta Poo
Sco Anuradha Nah
Vir U. Phalg. Toh
iL,
{
Native (female) has intense desire for children and dreams of having up to 9 or more. Ketu (planet
of past life desires and inclinations ) occupies the chib bearing & lovemaking nakshatra Purvaphalguni
ln the 5 house. The way she is going one can see that she is stuck in her Ketu area (pastlife area).
If she had moved towards her Rahu area she would have different more universal interests. The
readers can refer to "The Rahu-Ketu Experience" by this author to understand more about the
impoftance of balancing Rahu-lGtu energies.
Sa Su As MeR
Mo
Sa Su
As Mo
MeR
Ve Ma
Ra
Ke
Ne JuR Pl Ur

[page 433]
466
Uttarapfia[guni
Chart 12 : lohn Gotti
27 October 1940,4.30am, New York, USA
As 19:50:21
Su 10:49:41
Mo 22:09:37
Ma 2L:05:44
Me 03:45:36
Ju 18:29:16
Ve 00:41:58
Sa 18:52:10
Ra 16:36:48
Ke 16:36:48
Ur 01:55:04
Ne 03:35:23
Pl 11:17:33
Vir Hasta Nuh
Lib Swati Ray
Leo P. Phalg. Tee
Vir Hasta Tuh
Sco Anuradha Nah
Ari Bharani Loo
Vir U. Phalg. Toh
Ari Bharani Loo
Vir Hasta shah
Pis U. Bhadra. lya
Tau Krittika Ee
Vir U. Phalg. Pah
Can Pushya Hoh
The presence of th lord Venus in Uttaraphalguni made the native involved with the Mafia through
lineage from lathers side. 9th house relates to father and the authoratarian influence of Uttaraphalguni
shows through in John Gotti's personality and proJession. He became one of the most well-known
mafia dons to have come out of New York.
Ve Ne Ra As
Ma
Ke JuR
SaR Ur
PI
Mo
Me Su
VE NE
Ra As
Ma

[page 434]
467
t{asta
Chaft 13 :
29 Sept 1959, 9.20am, Belgium
As 06:01:22
Su 12:08:02
Mo 01:06:41
Ma 2t:57:52
Me 21:00:57
Ju 05:35:40
Ye 07:24:13
Sa 07:38:30
Ra t0:23:27
Ke 10:23:27
Ur 26:t6:I7
Ne 12:15:52
Pl 11:41:30
Lib Chitra Ree
Vir Hasta Poo
Leo Magha Mah
Vir Hasba Tuh
Vir Hasta Tuh
Sco Anuradha Nah
Leo Magha Moo
Sag Moola Bha
Vir Hasta Poo
Pis U. Bhadra. Jha
Can Ashlesha Day
Lib Swati Ray
Leo Magha May
Native (female) is a financial wizard and enjoys playing with money. Her 2nd and llh lord from the
Moon, Mercury is placed in its exaltation sign in the clever constellation of Hasta along with the l1h
lord (Gain lord) Sun and 2m tord (Wealth lord) Mars. The fact that all the 3 planeb are located in
Hasta gives her a penchant for book-keeping and tracking the movement of money in its present
currency form.
Ke
Ur
PI
Mo Ve
Sa JU As Ne Ra Su
Me Ma

[page 435]
468
Cftitra
Chart 14 :
26 January 1931, 11 pm, Melbourne, Australia
As 01:02:24
Su 12:43:55
Mo 07:31:54
Ma 14:30:36
Me 17:59:05
Ju 20:01:47
Ve 26:05:17
Sa 23:48:39
Ra 25:22:01
Ke 25:22:Ol
Ur 19:06:08
Ne 12:16:12
Pl 26:34:39
Ub Chitra Rah
Cap Shravana Joo
Ari Ashwini Cho
Can Pushya Dah
Sag P. Shad. Dah
Gem Punarvasu KaY
Sco Jyeshtha Yee
Sag P. Shad. Dah
Pis Revati Cha
Vir Chitra PaY
Pis Revati DaY
Leo Magha MaY
Gem Punarvasu Koh
This native has Chitra rising on the ascendant and is known to his acquaintances as a builder. Laying
foundations for homes was his occupation for over 30 years. This proves Chitras connection with
Vishvakarma and all types of construction acivitigs. The fact that the 10h lord is in Ashvini makes
him deal with the beginning paft of the construction process'
As
7
1
Mo
Ur Ra Mo PI
JuR
MaR
Su Ne
Me Sa Ve As Ke

[page 436]
469
Sutati
Chaft 15 :
24 September t970,10am, London
As 09:34:09
Su 07:26:53
Mo 29:37:38
Ma 19:59:46
Me 20:46:52
Ju 13:17:11
Ve 20:54:03
Sa 28:49:35
Ra 07:43:46
Ke O7:43:46
Ur L5:12:t7
Ne 05:12:44
Pl 03:54:52
Lib Swati Roo
Vir U. Phalg. Pee
Gem Punarvasu Hah
Leo P. Phalg. Tah
Leo P. Phalg. Tee
Lib Swati Ray
Lib Vishakha Tee
Ari Krittika Ah
Aqu Satabhi. Goh
Leo Magha Moo
Vir Hasta Shah
Sco Anuradha Nah
Vir U,Phlag. Pah
The native (male) has 3rd (enterprise lord) and 6th lord (effort lord) present in the suave nakshatra
of Swati. He is a budding enterpreneur who is planning to start his own independent company. This
highlights Swati's independent entrepreneurial nature. It has however taken him a long time to
develop enough self-confidence as Swati is a nakshatra which develops slowly over a long period of
time.
As Ju
Ve
.7 -
SaR Mo
Ra
Me
Ke Ma
Ne As JuVe
Pl Su
Ur

[page 437]
470
'/isfi"qkrtn
Chart 15 : Ted Bundy
24 November 1946, 2.30am, Burlington, Vermont
"v,
As 16:00:54 Vir
Su 08:18:39 Sco
Mo 14:41:25 Sco
Ma 19:38:28 Sco
Me 02:19:07 R Sco
lu 19:46:22 Lib
Ve 27:56:53 R Lib
Sa 15:46:01 R Can
Ra 19:02:09 Tau
Ke 19:02:09 Sco
Ur 27:24:27 Tau
Ne 17:01:37 Vir
Pl 20:L4:L9 Can
Hasta Shah
Anuradha Nee
Anuradha Nay
Jyeshtha Noh
Vishakha Toh
Swati Tah
Vishakha Tay
Pushya Dah
Rohini Vee
Jyeshtha Noh
Mrigashi Vo
Hasta Nuh
Ashlesha Doo
The first lord Mercury's presence in Vishakha gave Ted Bundy, the famous serial killer, a completely
obsessive personality. The readers may note through this example that Scorpio part of Vishakha is
much more prone to obsessive compulsive behaviour than the Libra part. He used his Mercury
energy in Scorpio in 3d house(house of imitation) to get into charcters of those he admired and
present that face to the world" He used Venus's charm in Vishakha to lure people (especially
females) into his world and in the end they fell victim to the overwhelming and destructive scorpio
energy in his chart. This example brings out the damage which Vishakha can inflict in the present
day and age once it chooses the wrong path.
MeR -
Su Mo
Ke Ma
Ur
Ra
PI
SaR
As Ne
MEK
Su Mc
Kp M:
Ju
VeR

[page 438]
471
Anuradfia
Chaft 17 : Ray Manzarek
12 February 1939, 7.10am, Chicago
As 05:43:33 Aqu Dhanish. Gay
Su 29:55:14 Cap Dhanish. Gee
Mo 15:36:50 Sco Anuradha Nay
Ma 15:33:17 Sco Anuradha Nay
Me 24:54:19 o640/o C-ap Dhanish. Gah
Ju L6:44:49 Aqu Satabhi. See
Ve 13:33:47 Sag p. Shad. Boo
Sa 21:15:18 pis Revati Doh
Ra 19:37:05 Lib Swati Tah
Ke 19:37:05 Ari Bharani Loo
Ur 21:01:02 Ari Bharani Lay
Ne 29:42:46 Leo U.phatg. Tay
Pl 06:53:08 Can pushya Hay
This native got fame for his role as organ player and musical composer/arranger in the 60,s music
group, The Doors. The presence of Moon and Mars in the 10th house(house of occupation), in the
nakshatra of groupwork, Anuradha, points to the same. There are 3 dhanishta placements in this
chart making it clear that the native will be deeply involved in rhythm and music. But it is only the
Anuradha planets which made him express his talents within a group format and made his group a
worldwide phenomenon.
8 MaMo
5
Ne
Sa Ke
Ur
As Ju PI
Me Su Ne
Ve Ma Mo Ra

[page 439]
ffi€!*Fe-l
472
lyuhta
Chart 18 : Frank Sinatra
12 Dec 1915, 3.45am, New York
As 06:06:29
Su 26:25:37
Mo 11:01:49
Ma 04:51:36
Me 24:19:01
Ju 27:lL:t3
Ve 19:06:33
Sa 22:10:54 R
Ra 18:06:26
Ke 18:06:26
Ur 20:06:14
Ne 09:37:54
Pl 09:51:05
Vir U. Phalg. Pah
Sco Jyeshtha Yee
Aqu Satabhi. Sah
Leo Magha Mee
Sco Jyeshtha Yee
Aqu P. Bhadra. Dah
Sag P. Si,ad. Dah
Gem Punarvasu KaY
Cap Shravana Joh
Can Ashlesha Dee
Cap Shravana Guh
Can Pushya HaY
Gem Ardra Koo
.J
:i
7
The successful show singer and crooner, Frank Sinatra has his 9b lord Sun and 7hl10b lord Mercury
placed in Jyestha in the hidden 12h house. It has become known that his rise and success was
orchestrated by the criminal underworld' He could be considered an employee of the mafia was
and shared his mafia connections with the Kennedy family' Among his Jyestha 12s house activities
As
o
3 Pl SaR
PI
SaR
Mo Ju Ke
Ne
Ra
Ur Ma
Ve Me
Su As
he was fanprs for bmzing and womanising'

[page 440]
473
Mufa
Chart 19 :
21 October 1936, 6am, Enadi, Haryana, India
As 18:09:32
Su 04:24:56
Mo 04:55:40
Ma 22:A5:4L
Me 17:18:53
Ju 28:26:03
Ye 04:17:20
Sa 23:32:06
Ra 04:22:22
Ke 04:22:22
Ur 15:01:18
Ne 24:58:51
Pl 05:45:53
Vir Hasta Nuh
Lib Chitra Ree
Sag Moola yoh
Leo P. Phalg. Tee
Vir Hasta Nuh
Sco Jyeshtha yoo
Sco Anuradha Nah
Aqu P. Bhadra. Soh
Sag Moola yoh
Gem Mrigashi Kee
Ari Bharani Lee
Leo P. Phalg. Too
Can Pushya Hoo
This Native (male) has been trying to get to the root of his ancestry and lineage for over 30 years.
This is very much in keeping with Moon's placement in Mula in the 4h house (house of family origin).
He also is highly interested in rejuvenating herbs which would reverse ageing. Considering ihe is
undergoing his Rahu Major period and Rahu is posited in Mula , this reveals Mula's relationships with
all kind of herbs especially the ones in which the roots have more therapeauuc importance.
RaMo I
Ur Ke
SaR PI
Ma Ne
Ra Mo Ve Ju Su Me As

[page 441]
.-r#-
474
lPuntasfi.otrfia
Chaft 20 :
12 December 1955, 1,32Pm, Paris
As 08:55:23
Su 26:27:43
Mo O7:I4:43
Ma 15:29:23
Me 00:52:03
lu 08:12:29
Ve 22:08:39
Sa 03:33:19
Ra 23:52:35
Ke 23:52:35
Ur 08:34:46
Ne 06:27:51
Pl 05:20:02
Pis U. Bhadra. Tu
Sco Jyeshtha Yee
Sco Anuradha Nee
Lib Swati Roh
Sag Moola YaY
Leo Magha Moo
Sag P. Shad. Pah
Sco Anuradha Nah
Sco Jyeshtha Vee
Tau Mrigashi VaY
Can PushYa HaY
Lib Chitra Ree
Leo Magha Mee
This native has been running Venus major period for the last 8 years and she has been enjoying all
PurvashadhasignificaUonslikemusic,seasideho|idays,luxuriesandcomfoftsofa|lkinds'Purvashada,s
carefree spirit has kept her out of the general downers of modern life' All of it though comes at a
price - since Venus is inimical with the ascendant lord , she has had to sacrifice personal freedom &
integrity to have all the above
As
12
9 MeVe
As Ke
Ur
PI Ju
Me Ve Ka 5U
Sa Mo Ne Ma

[page 442]
475
Attarasfiadfia
Chart 21 :
21 November 1925, 8.50am, Kasganj, India
As 10:14:33
Su 05:29:14
Mo 09:52:56
Ma 12:13:05
Me 27:20:L4
Ju 27:23:36
Ve 22:33:L7
Sa 25:31:59
Ra 05:39:10
Ke 05:39:10
Ur 28:46:57
Ne 01:57:52,'
Pl 2L:40:26
Sag Moola Bee
Sco Anuradha Nah
Cap U. Shad. Jee
Lib Swati Ray
Sco Jyeshtha Yoo
Sag U. Shad. Bay
Sag P. Shad. Pah
Lib Vishakha Too
Can Pushya Hoo
Cap U. Shad. Jah
Aqu P. Bhadra. Dah
Leo Magha Mah
Gem Punarvasu Kay
The native was born into a serious Brahminical lineage and kept a Thrusday fast throughout her life.
Jupiter's presence in Uttarashada made her have an upright, pious attitude when it came to baditional
aspects of Vedic Brahminical practices. The self-righteous aspect of Uttarashada was clearly evident
in the native s personality. She was also the untitled head of the town she lived in and people looked
upto her. Uttarashada usually gets people
As Ve
Ju
q
PI
Ur Ra
Ke Mo Ne
As Ve
Ju Su MeSa Ma

[page 443]
476
Sfi.raaana
Chart 22 :
7 August L942,7'OS Pm, New York
As 03:55:41
Su 2l:43:47
Mo 05:44:55
Ma 11:06:31
l4e 27:07:30
lu 20:00:52
Ye 25:49:45
Sa 17:27:25
Ra 12:11:45
Ke 12:11:45
Ur 11:04:08
Ne 04:58:15
Pl 12:35:33
Cap U. Shad. lah
Can Ashlesha Doo
Gem Mrigashi Kee
Leo Magha MaY
Can Ashlesha Doh
Gem Punarvasu KaY
Gem Punarvasu Koh
Tau Rohini Vee
Leo Magha MaY
Aqu Satabhi. Sah
Tau Rohini Oh
Vir U.Phalg. Pah
Can PushYa Hoh
Native has spent his life working in the music recording industry' His Ascendant constellation is
Shravana. His job is to listen to the music artistes in the studio and finalize the right takes. The job
primarily involves listening and deciding what sounds good' This example definitely makes shravana
live upto its name.
As
10
4'
Pl Su
Me
Ur
Sa
Mo Ju
Ve
Ke Pl Su
Me
As Ma Ra
Ne

[page 444]
477
Efranisfita
Chart 23 :
7 November L982, tl.47arn, Southport, Australia
As 28:03:38
Su 20:42:26
Mo 04:59:09
Ma 10:57:38
Me 13:00:47
Ju 25:49:15
Ye 21:27:40
Sa 03:52:07
Ra 13:09:25
Ke 13:09:25
Ur 10:02:04
Ne 01:40:02
Pl 03:56:38
Cap Dhanish Gee
Ub Vishakha Tee
Can Pushya Hoo
Sag Moola Bee
Lib Swati Ray
Lib Vishakha Too
Lib Vishakha Tee
Lib Chitra Ree
Gem Ardra Gha
Sag Moola Bee
Sco Anuradha Noo
Sag Moola Vay
Lib Chitra Ree
The above native is a multi-talented musician. She is proficient at drums as well as organ and piano.
One can see Dhanishta rising on the ascendant with the ascendant lord exalted in the chitra ( the
nakshatra of form). Also Mars, Dhanishta's lord, is in a friendly fire sign in the 12s house (house of
rhythm and dance). One can
As
10 Ve Ju
Sa Pl Me Su4
Mo
Ra
Mo
As
Ne Ma
Ke Ur
Ve Ju
Sa Pl
Ma Srr

[page 445]
478
SfiatahfrisfiaL
Chaft 24 :
23 January 1936, 11.54am, London
As 06:17:31
Su 09:21:02
Mo 28:40:00
Ma 14:00:14
Me 24:37:16 R
Ju 23:10:45
Ve 00:52:09
Sa 15:08:32
Ra 18:45:31
Ke 18:45:31
Ur 08:39:06
Ne 23:28:56
Pl 03:11:51
Tau
cap
Sa9
Aqu
cap
Sco
sag
Aqu
Sag
Gem
Ari
Leo
Can
Krittika Oo
U. Shad. lee
U. Shad. Bay
Satabhi. See
Dhanish. Gah
Jyeshtha Yah
Moola Yah
Satabhi. See
P. Shad. Dah
Ardra Cha
Ashwini Cho
P. Phalg. Too
Punarvasu Hee
Native has lived most of her life in foreign lands and made a career out of researching /writing about
goldmines in the desert plains of Sahara, Egypt and Ehtiopa. Her 10b lord Saturn is conjunct 12s
lord Mars in the nakhatra of shatabishak. The fact that Shatabhisha represents vast uninhabitable
terrain and hidden objects becomes clear from this chart.
As
2
11 Ma Sa
8
Ju
Ur As Ke
Ma Sa PI
MeR
Su Ne
Ve Ra
Mo JU

[page 446]
479
Qurztahfra^drapafa
Chart 25 |
13 March 1964, 1lam, Delhi, India
As 21:40:43
Su 29:19:12
Mo 18:11:46
Ma 23:55:52
Me 29:13:24
lu 29:37:46
Ve 13:05:31
Sa 05:25:57
Ra 14:10:59
Ke 14:10:59
Ur L4:02:21
Ne 24:19:55
Pl 79:t9:37
Tau Rohini Voo
Aqu P. Bhadra. Dah
Aqu Satabhi. See
Aqu P. Bhadra. Soh
Aqu P. Bhadra. Dah
Pis Revati Chee
Ari Ashwini Lah
Aqu Dhanish. Gay
Gem Ardra Nga
Sag P.Shad. Boo
Leo P.Phalg. Moh
Lib Vishakha Too
Leo P. Phalg. Tah
This native has 5 malefics placed in the lOh house, 3 of them in the sign of Purvabadrapada namely
his creative and coordination planet Mercury karaka for the body Sun and energy planet Mars. He
has spent a great deal of time teaching and mastering his own martial arts style, where training
includes punching trees in order to increase one's capacity for pain and toughness. His training
methods involve self-torture in form of hitting tree trunks with bare hands and feet which is very
much in keeping in with the nature of Purvabhadrapada. He has left his home and family to become
a wandering Sadhu. The tough ascetic lifestyle without any real spiritual goal he has chosen once
again points to energies of Puruabhadarpada. Before this ascetic turn, he had also bcen involved in
drugs, prostitution and all other kinds of dark distortions that plague humanity in Kaliyuga.
As
z
in Sul-' Sa Mo Ma Me
Ju Ve As Ra
Su
Sa Mo
Me Mc
Ur Pl
Ke Ne

[page 447]
480
lJttmahfrairapatra
Chart 26 :
13 lune 1952, 1.34am, Gorha, India
As tt:57:24
Su 28:33:50
Mo 02:04:00
Ma 08:01:05
Me 03:11:16
Ju 17:00:22
Ve 25:15:17
Sa 15:00:04
Ra 01:35:08
Ke 01:35:08
Ur 19:36:46
Ne 25:49:00
Pl 26:18:51
Pis U. Bhadra. Doh
Tau Mrigashi Vo
Aqu Dhanish Goo
Ub Swati Roo
Gem Mrigashi Kah
Ari Bharani Loo
Tau Mrigashi Vay
Vir Hasta Shah
Aqu Dhanish. Goo
Leo Magha Mah
Gem Ardra Cha
Vir Chitra Pay
Can Ashlesha Day
The above native (female) has had a steady progress in spiritual discipline in her Saturn major
period. Saturn in this case releases Uttarabhadrapada's spiritual potential as the nakshatra lord. The
fact that it is also the 12h lord and aspects the ascendant gives it more strength to act. The native
ran through the whole Jupiter major period without seriously entering the spiritual/occult realm.
This exemplifies the fact that the nakshatra lord has more power to unleash the nakshatra energy
than the sign lord in which the nakshatra is posited.
As
12
MeUr 3
As Ju Ve Su Me Ur
Ra Mc PI
Ke
Ma Sa Ne

[page 448]
481
fuaati
Chart2T:
21 May L975,l2.3Lam, Bidar, India
As 00:20:52
Su 05:37:34
Mo 07:02:41
Ma 06:04:09
Me 27:00:00
Ju 21:00:55
Ve 18:42:01
Sa 22:14:40
Ra 07:40:20
Ke 07:40:20
Ur 05:44:29
Ne 17:13:20
Pl 13:09:49
Aqu Dhanish. Goo
Tau Krittika Oo
Vir U. Phalg. Pee
Pis U. Bhadra. Doo
Tau Mrigashi Vo
Pis Revati Doh
Gem Ardra Cha
Gem Punarvasu Kay
Sco Anuradha Nee
Tau Krittika Ay
Lib Chitra Ree
Sco Jyeshtha Noh
Vir Hasta Poo
The native has been running Jupiter period for the last 4 years. In that time, he has already authored
3 comprehensive treatises on different aspects of the cosmic science of Astrology. Jupiter's presence
in Revati in the 2d house (house of accumulated knowledge) allows him to gain an oceanic and
complete perspective of any issue a hand, Obviously the 1s79fr house conjunction helps but the
stregnth of Mercury is the key when judging Revati's functioning. Mercury is involved in an exchange
here while establishing connections with the highly spirualizing Sun-Ketu conjunction.
As
11
8 RaNe
Ma Ju Su Ke
Me
\/o
Sa
As
Ra Ne Ur Mo Pl

[page 449]
483
, Aftarutn[
It has been the authorb endeavor to write the majority of thb book in harmony with nature's
everchanging & time-bound functionings. Each nakshatra was dealt with only when Moon was
passing through that pafticular nakshatra. The same is the case with the visualization and drawing
of the nakshatra images. This was done to minimize the many imperfections which tend to creep in
despite utmost care. Each nakshatra has a special power to assert its own energy during the Ume-
period in which Moon is passing through them and who better to guide what is written about them
than they themselves.
The impoftance of learning & connecting to the energies of the nakshatras through the images
included in this work cannot be re-iterated enough. It is our hope that the readers will see the
uniqueness of these images in relation to the other vedic literature published in modem times and
will come up with their own visualizations & techniques to enrich the learning process.
The study of nakshatras has a vast scope beyond natal astrology. The esoteric sections in this
work are nothing more than rnere signboards pointing towards the hisrerto unknown galactic level
functionings which nakshatras encode and the ancient sages were privy b.
**,1.

[page 450]
484
tsi,6frofiapfi.y
Sage Parashara, Brihat Parashara Hora Sastra: Volume I. Translation by G. C. Sharma'
Sagar Pubfications, New Delhi, India. ').
Sage Parashara, Brihat Parashara Hora Sastra: Volume IL Translation by G. C. Sharma,
Sagar Publications, New Delhi, India.
Sage Jaimini, Jaimini Sutram, Translation by P. S. Shastri' jw {ti i;.,,
Varahamihira, Brihat Jataka, Translation by Usha-Shashi, Sagar Publications, New Delhi, India.
Mantreswara, Phaladeepika, Translation by S. S. Sareen, Sagar Publications, 1992, New Delhi,
India.
Rama Daivagylq.Muhurta Chintamani, Translation by Girish Chand Sharma, Sagar Publications,
New Delhi, India. :rr?
pt. DhundhirajrJa6$A,rylfrgtrg,T,tEgp-tion by Gitish Chand Sharma, Sagar Publications 1998,
New Delhi, India. (x;. +qS r
Taittriya samhita, Translation & cpmmentary by Bhatbabhaskara Mishra.
prashna Marga, Vol. I & II, Translated by B. V. Raman, Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, Delhi,
1985.

[page 451]
485
f
x
trJ
a.2=
oz
ott
o
E
oE
IL
-g
UJ
CL
(,
o
E
6
tro
ct
(,
th
C'r
oo o() o4
3o(J
I
IE
G
3
E
a)
CD
o
oI
!,
:tr
o=
o
oo
o
ED
c
o=
E
.9
J
Horse 4 2 2 3 2 2 2 I 0 I 3 3 2 1
Elephant 2 4 3 3 2 2 2 2 3 1 2 3 2 0
Sheep 2 3 4 2 1 2 1 3 3 I 2 0 3 1
Serpent 3 3 2 4 2 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 0 2
Dog 2 2 1 2 4 2 1 2 2 1 0 2 I 1
Cat 2 2 2 1 2 4 0 I 2 I 3 3 2 1
Rat 2 2 I 1 1 0 4 2 2 2 2 2 I 2
Cow 1 2 3 1 2 2 2 4 3 U 3 2 2 1
Buffalo 0 3 3 1 2 2 2 3 4 1 2 2 2 1
Tiger 1 1 1 2 1 1 2 0 1 4 1 1 2 I
Hare I 2 2 2 0 3 2 3 2 1 4 2 2 1
Monkey 5 3 0 2 2 3 2 2 2 I 2 4 3 2
Mongoose 2 2 3 3 1 2 1 2 2 2 2 3 4 2
Lion 1 0 1 2 1 1 2 1 2 1 1 2 2 4
S e?gnt Conpatihitity'Iahto
One can see from this table that nakshatras sharing the same sexual animal are the most
compatible. Apart from comparing the Moons of each paftner for sexual compatibility, one can
also compare the planets relating to lovemaking/sex in the horoscopes such as 12h lord, 5n lord,'i
Venus etc. J

[page 452]
486
ftv{mriag e Conp qtihifrty'Ia6 te
I
ARIES TAUR, GEHIN CATIC
I
wRG LIBRA SOOR SAGr C,APR AQUA PIgCES
Bride
groom's
Str
Bdde's
Star EEg
E
!:EgEgfuE
a
Ec€EET
i!
e i'0
sEg
a3A
E€E
3-|J
trE
!r:i
€ !!
E 's
(,o> tEi
.E
iEEfui
'EE
E#F
IE
Esr
Asrlnl
Bharani
Krittika
233t27
33 28 2:t
262328
L7 2322
lt 25 la
18 10 t5
25 16 1t
t7 25?5
19 19 lC
22rO 27
m2224
212622
202.L'
L9L7 A
15 10 20
91012
1918 3
15 14 14
222'22
13 2a 21
27 t4 L9
18 24 13
18 17 19
16 19 25
12l.23
L9L7 E
25 19 11
252520
27 zato
ta t? ?s
19 14 15
9 19 2.3
2t )1 1A
L2326
22 4E
1' 1^ 1n
Kdttika
Rohinl
l.lrioashaE
t9 19 19
zr 2:l 11
ztL18
28 18 25
2l,243{|
27 35?'
r7t t7
2623 22
18 2:t 22
21 23 19
26 27 L2
26 19 21
L9 2122
LO 21 27
19 t5 2a
20 18 23
25 25 1a
23 25 11
22 914
1715 8
10 917
2t2rl,o
tl2l)2j3
23 2121
22L5 7
13 19 11
L1016
L2tO 21
16 18 19
2L26L2
29 30 23
24 24 29
L7 26 2E
m22L3
2627 L9
25L827
ilrigash
Ardra
aLr 2t
la 25 2l
la zt 21
19 26 19
19 2a 25
t9 222t
2a 33 31
'42a'5
3L24,l
1t 11 13
12m12
!l 21 15
22r82'
2t27 m
21 25 19
31 :t4 20
'42127
2i2126
L327 t9
m27 20
t9 27 2l
13 t3 ta
1319 5
1420 6
23L9 23
L52a27
ta27 27
19 2/t 10
2t 2217
2122L6
L22122
t9 t2t7
lE 13 16
211 26
18 26 26
r7 2626
Punanas
Pushya
21?821
29 m26
tB tt tt
2L?425
23 25 18
tt il ic
17 10 13
10 18 2(
11 11 13
aga
34 2a 29
27nn
16 20 1a
18 14 2:t
15 15 17
16 17 19
15 2tt 11
19 19 24
t9 26 20
11 25 20
2a 1t 16
19 25 lO
t9 t7 20
la 19 25
7202')
L7 1220
22L5 7
L6 27 2l
26 27 It
13 13 25
1259
413t,
17 18 1t
It 25 24
25 18 26
t7 20 L2
magha
Puruaphal
lrttrnoh.l
t9 19 15
EI' L9
15 25 20
16 917
2023L5
2L2624
20 20 1C
18 26 2!
27 t9 L7
t5 la 15
22 16 10
lrt 23 18
2a 30 26
30 28 3a
2634?l
t4 t1 L9
2420 5
16 15 12
zt 10 15
92417
16 25 16
2124t2
23 2224
22 30 16
2419 8
20 t7 24
92525
t 1t7
1918 5
20 20 11
232117
91823
17 t0 15
17 18 12
23 L521
15 26 2a
lrttaraph.l
Hasta
chitra
11 2t 16
11 18 16
12414
20252a
2lJ2321
zt 18 10
31 21 23
32 tt zl
Itu221
t7 20m
18 26 2l
21 11 2!t
L5 23 17
15 20 15
20613
2827 24
25 2a 2a
2427 28
15 25 16
29 25 18
ra 2a 12
20 26 13
tt it tE
14 29 29
1527 23
24 21 L'
2:t 2/t 1t
16 914
19 10 13
16 2!a 16
t7 2826
L5 26 21
19 10 19
Chitra
Swati
2i2 Ll2A
20 21 16
2L2:r2lJ
23 la 10
lL1124
15917
12 20 lt
262621
18 20 2(
19 11 25
27 20 t3
m2017
21tO L7
12242:'
16 la 17
27 20 20
2J527 2l
17 18 26
2lt 27 3t
2A2aZO
33 19 2a
226m
9 2115
16 16 21
27 L3 2t
2327 t9
27 2t L3
23 25 23
2t 2226
15 15 29
18 26 18
2t 22 23
21 26 20
12 312
1a1911
1312 a
Vish.ldt.
Anuradha
,ydra
15 16 r,3
23 1a 18
LOLT 23
t9 13 21 112lt lt 18 1l
?sLT?J!
9192!
21 22 2l
21mA
312315
t7 1826
24 25 tl
tt tl 24
2L7tS
620 16
19 14 10
2A2r 3t
28 28 31
31 30 2a
2tLS '
15 13 2t
1/t 16 15
tl 11 25
2525 t2
20 20 25
2125t9
rt2021
2117 tO
1914 9
21 l7 26
9 2020?'222!t L2 21
l.lula
Purv.sh.d
Ultrhdr.d
11 19 25
23t7 t9
24 25 lt
19 l2 12
ta t8 10
61016
21 la 12
t9 252'
'52627
,123
zl 1a 16
2:222 A
2418 9
191725
E2425
13 13 26
427 t2
z'?'20
2621 26
t227 m
20 19 12
22 16 16
16 15 17
lE 23 17
2a2at3
272'',/|
2l5332'
13 14 19
2222 S
15 15 13
282L']
1123?a
222t2'
16 2a 26
m 2230
20fi22
t tt nsh.d
Shravam
Ohanishta
27 zata
2827 t4
20 11 25
'2'622
t2t7 26
2:l 19 11
t9 7A 2l
2:t 19 21
la 16 !l
''''L1
2l2at4
2t L3 2'
a m21
5 1820
18 410
A24L'
2324t7
15 17 15
22 31 1a
24 2l L4
2924?f
1227 2L
t227 2l
26t226
LlAI'
L.2215
20 614
2327 25
2624 27
2527 2A
15 16 21
17 L7 20
L7 23L7
29 3|J22
2',2923
24L522
Dhanishte t9 10 25
ta20 26
t7 24t9
{Et
31 2!t 25
2a t0 30
11 18 17
20 12 12
z,17 L'
12 ala
6 1319
11 19 12
2a 10 18
zt 19 ll
18 25 16
t7 L9 L7
10 10 25
15 15 17
La2|, 24
202t 26
18 26 20
25 11 25
26 20 18
20 26 11
20 15 23
22212;/|
15 29 29
16 18 18
t7t 24
222227
24332'
33 2a 29
27 L92l
15613
8 2415
16 22 19Puilebh.d
Puilabhad 11 21 16
zl25la
25 Zt 10
19 Zt 25
21 25 1a
L3L' 25
a\7 17
L' z525
252'2l5
17 zsL'
26 19 20
2125Lt
L622L4
LT25?5
t22222
16 15 18
27269
2425 L9
1l lE 12
219lt
1210 a
19 2tt 9
18 18 23
to 20 21
tl?l''
at2t29
2628m
23 2421
2l,2914
2t2L 22
15 715
5 2121
13 15 17
2a3330
33 2a 33
29 33 2ARevati

[page 453]
488
OSfA
Orion Sefinof d foffilotionfn Astrofogy
OSFA is dedicated to enhancing public awareness about Jyotish (aka. Vedic Astrology & Indian
Astrology) and its related fieldg through lecturing, research, writings, media, readings and courses.
OSFA accepts donations. It also welcomes lecture oppor.tunities, event collaborations and
organized reading sessions. Those wanting to help, associate or contribute can write directly to us at
astrology@karmablueprint.com
OSFA is open to all who wouH like to further the cause of Astrology and welcomes other
Astrologers to join its team.
OSFA is an open forum for all those who want to share their thoughts on Astrology and other
Esoteric subjects. You can send us your Piece or Article via Email
For more information about OSFA please visit -
' Website Homepage : www.osfa.org.uk
Online Course : www.osfa.ory.u k/ onlinecource.htm
Consultations & Readings : www.osfa.org.uk/consulLhtm
Publications : www.osfa.org.uk/ book-19.htm